# Emergency SeverityEmergency Severity Index, Version 4:Index, Version 4: ImplementationImplementation HandbookHandbook

###### Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

**_Advancing Excellence in Health Care • www.ahrq.gov_**


-----

### Note from the Director

The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality is pleased to bring you the Emergency Severity
_Index, Version 4: Implementation Handbook. This manual covers all details of the Emergency_
Severity Index (ESI)—a five-level emergency department triage algorithm that provides
clinically relevant stratification of patients into five groups from 1 (most urgent) to 5 (least
urgent) on the basis of acuity and resource needs.

After emergency physicians Richard Wuerz and David Eitel developed the ESI in 1998 and
pilot testing yielded favorable results, the ESI Triage Group was formed. Further work on the
initial development of ESI was carried out under an AHRQ grant. The ESI Triage Group, which
consisted of medical clinicians, managers, educators, and researchers, further refined the
algorithm to what it is today.

In keeping with our mission to improve the quality, safety, efficiency, and effectiveness of
health care for all Americans, one of AHRQ's areas of emphasis is training. Along with the
accompanying set of two DVDs, this handbook will provide invaluable assistance to
emergency department nurses, physicians, and administrators in the implementation of a
comprehensive ESI educational program. These materials are based on ESI Version 4, which
updates the algorithm with a particular emphasis on the expansion of ESI level 1 criteria and
refinement of the pediatric fever criteria.

A well-implemented ESI program will help hospital emergency departments rapidly identify
patients in need of immediate attention, better identify patients who could safely and more
efficiently be seen in a fast-track or urgent care center rather than the main ED, and more
accurately determine thresholds for diversion of ambulance patients from the ED.

We hope that you find this tool useful in your ongoing efforts to improve the quality of care
provided by your emergency department.

Carolyn M. Clancy, M.D.
Director
Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality


-----

### Chapter 2.Triage Acuity Systems


##### Standardization of Triage Acuity

Although there are more than 110 million visits to
U.S. emergency departments (EDs) each year
(McCaig & Burt, 2004) there are very little aggregate
data about those visits on the local, regional or
national level. It is difficult to answer important
questions such as “Which EDs see the sickest
patients?” and “How does patient acuity affect ED
overcrowding?” There is growing interest in the
establishment of standards for ED data in the United
States to support clinical care, ED surveillance,
benchmarking, and research activities (Barthell,
Coonan, Finnell, Pollock, & Cochrane, 2004; Gilboy,
Travers & Wuerz, 1999; Handler et al., 2004;
National Center for Injury Prevention and Control

[NCIPC], 1997; Zimmermann, 2001). One important
ED data element is triage acuity, which has been
defined by the Data Elements for Emergency
Department Systems Task Force as: “Classification of
patient acuity that characterizes the degree to which
the patient's condition is life- or limb-threatening,
and whether immediate treatment is needed to
alleviate symptoms” (NCIPC, 1997, p. 94).

Unfortunately, there is great variability in ED triage
acuity systems, particularly in the United States
(Emergency Nurses Association [ENA], 1997). The
various systems describe triage categories using
different labels, and the definitions for each level are
not universally agreed upon. Examples of acuity
rating systems are listed in Table 2-1. Given the lack
of standardization of triage acuity data in the U.S., it
is not surprising that the ED has been described as a
“black box” of vital public health information that
is largely inaccessible in present forms (Martinez,
1995).

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a promising
new tool for triage acuity assessment in the ED. It
has been shown to be reproducible across EDs,


including urban and rural settings and academic and
community hospitals (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy
& Wuerz, 2003). If implemented widely in U.S. EDs,
the ESI has the potential to become a standard for
triage acuity assessment. In this chapter, we describe
the types of triage systems traditionally used in EDs
in the United States, and then present a review of
the research on those systems. Next, a brief
description of recent triage methods that have been
developed in Australia, Canada and the United
Kingdom is presented. The chapter concludes with a
review of the research on the new ESI triage system
and discusses the potential benefits of the ESI.

##### Triage Systems in the United States

Though many U.S. hospitals still use a three- or fourlevel triage system, the trend is toward the use of
five-level systems. The National Center for Health
Statistics plans to replace four-level triage data with
five-level triage data in future national
benchmarking surveys of U.S. EDs. This decision was
based upon the growing evidence that five-level
triage acuity data are more reliable and valid than
three-level systems (personal communication, Linda
McCaig, National Center for Health Statistics,
October 6, 2004).

Both ENA and the American College of Emergency
Physicians (ACEP) have come out in support of fivelevel triage systems for U.S. EDs. A joint ENA-ACEP
task force was convened in 2003 to study the
evidence on five-level triage systems. The task force's
work is ongoing at present. The ACEP and ENA
issued the following joint statement in 2003:

_ACEP and ENA believe that quality of patient_
_care would benefit from implementing a_
_standardized emergency department (ED) triage_
_scale and acuity categorization process. Based on_


**Table 2-1. Examples of Triage Acuity Systems**

**2 levels** **3 levels** **4 levels** **5 levels**
Emergent Emergent Life-threatening Resuscitation
Non-emergent Urgent Emergent Emergent
Nonurgent Urgent Urgent
Nonurgent Nonurgent
Referred


-----

_expert consensus of currently available evidence,_
_ACEP and ENA support the adoption of a_
_reliable, valid five-level triage scale (ACEP,_
_2003; ENA, 2003)._

In a paper published by the task force in 2005, both
the ESI and Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS)
were recommended as valid and reliable triage
systems. (Fernandes et al., 2005) In light of the
growing evidence supporting five-level triage
systems, it is likely that more U.S. hospitals are now
using some form of five-level triage. The ENA plans
to collect data about U.S. hospitals' use of the
various triage systems in their upcoming ED survey
(personal communication, Susan MacLean, ENA,
August 23, 2004).

##### Research on Triage Systems in the United States

There is a growing body of research on triage acuity
systems. The research has focused on two key
features of acuity ratings by triage nurses: reliability
and validity (Pedhazur & Schmelkin, 1991; Waltz,
Strickland & Lenz, 1991). Reliability is the
consistency, or agreement, among those using a
rating system. There are two types of reliability that
pertain to ED triage acuity ratings. First, interrater
reliability is a measure of reproducibility: Will two
different nurses rate the same patient with the same
triage acuity level? Intrarater reliability is an
indication of whether the same nurse, over time,
will rate the same patient with the same acuity level.
Several studies in the United States have
demonstrated poor inter- and intrarater reliability of
conventional three-level triage systems (Gill, Reese &
Diamond, 1996; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers &
Tintinalli, 2002; Wuerz, Fernandes & Alarcon, 1998).
In one study, 305 triage ratings were reviewed after
all triage nurses attended a mandatory refresher
course on the hospital's three-level triage scale
(Travers et al., 2002). The original triage nurses'
ratings were compared with retrospective ratings
assigned by an expert panel of ED triage nurses, and
there was agreement in approximately half of the
cases.

Validity is the accuracy of the rating system, and
assesses how well the system measures what it is
intended to measure. The validity of acuity ratings is
an indication of whether or not the rating, for
example, of “nonurgent” is an accurate assessment
of the lack of urgency of an ED patient's problem.
Validity has proven difficult to assess for triage
acuity, and has not been reported in research studies


on conventional three-level triage in the United
States. Unlike the urine culture, which is the gold
standard for the correct clinical diagnosis of a
urinary tract infection, there is no clear gold
standard against which the validity of triage acuity
ratings can be measured. However, proxy measures
that have been used to evaluate five-level systems
include admission rates, resource utilization and 6month mortality.

##### Triage Acuity Research on Five- Level Systems Abroad

There are well-validated and reliable five-level triage
systems that have become the standard in other
countries. Three of those systems are described in
Table 2-2.

The Australasian Triage Scale (ATS), a system
developed in Australia, has been used throughout
Australia and New Zealand since the early 1990s
(Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 1994,
2002; Cameron, Bradt & Ashby, 1996). The
Australian Council on Healthcare Standards has
adopted the ATS as a basis of ED assessment and
quality of care, and triage ratings are subject to
regular review. Australian EDs are expected to treat
patients according to standards based on the triage
category. For example, an emergency patient must
be seen within 10 minutes, whereas a nonurgent
patient must be seen within 2 hours.

Validity and reliability of the ATS have been
evaluated in several studies. In the absence of a true
gold standard for triage acuity assessment,
researchers have compared the five-level scale to
other severity of illness scales and outcomes
(Cameron et al., 1996; Cleary, Ashby, Jelinek &
Lagaida, 1994, Erwich, Bond, Phillips, & Baggoley,
1997). Triage levels correlated highly with diseaseand population-specific scales including the Injury
Severity Scales, trauma score, and cardiac, asthma
and pediatric scales. The ATS has been shown to
correlate strongly with resource consumption and
outcome data, such as admission rates, ED length of
stay and mortality rates. Research has also shown
that the ATS has a fair to moderate degree of
interrater reliability in studies in which triage nurses
were asked to rate the acuity of patients described in
case study format (Dilley & Standen, 1998, Jelinek
& Little, 1996).

Five-level triage systems have also been
implemented in the United Kingdom (U.K.) and
Canada. The Manchester Triage Scale is used in the


-----

U.K., and utilizes a presentational flow-chart based
format (Manchester Triage Group, 1997). Nurses first
identify the patient's chief complaint, and then
choose one of 52 flow charts to conduct a structured
interview and then assign a triage level from 1
(immediate care needed) to 5 (care within 4 hours).
The system has been endorsed by the Accident and
Emergency Nurses Association (Zimmermann, 2001).
There is limited research on the Manchester system.
In one study of reliability, triage nurse ratings were
compared retrospectively to senior medical staff
ratings; agreement was only fair to moderate
(Goodacre, Gillett, Harris & Houlihan, 1999).

The Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) was
developed by a group of Canadian emergency
physicians. (Beveridge & Ducharme, 1997; Canadian
Association for Emergency Physicians [CAEP], 2002).
The National Emergency Nurses' Affiliation, Inc.
(NENA) and the Canadian Association for
Emergency Physicians (CAEP) have endorsed the
CTAS as the national standard for ED triage.
Canadian hospitals are required to submit data to
the Canadian government, including CTAS ratings,
on all ED visits. The Canadian five-level scale has
also been shown to have good interrater reliability
in studies in which clinicians rated the acuity of
written scenarios taken from actual patient cases


(Beveridge, Ducharme, Janes, Beaulieu & Walter,
1999; Manos, Petrie, Beveridge, Walter & Ducharme,
2002).

##### History of the Emergency Severity Index (ESI)

The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a five-level
triage scale developed by ED physicians Richard
Wuerz and David Eitel in the United States (Gilboy
et al., 1999; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers & Gilboy,
2000). The two originators believed that a principal
role for an emergency department triage instrument
is to facilitate the prioritization of patients based on
the urgency of the patients' conditions. The triage
nurse determines priority by posing the question,
“Who should be seen first?” Drs. Wuerz and Eitel
realized, however, that when more than one toppriority patient is present simultaneously, the
operating question becomes, “How long can
everybody wait?” The ESI was developed around a
new conceptual model of ED triage. In addition to
asking which patient should be seen first, triage
nurses use the ESI to also consider what resources
are necessary to get the patient through to an ED
disposition. The ESI retains the traditional
foundation of patient urgency, and then seeks to


**Table 2-2 Five-level Triage Systems**

**Patient should be seen**
**System** **Countries** **Levels** **by provider within**

Australasian Triage Scale (ATS) Australia 1 - Resuscitation Level 1 - 0 minutes
(formerly National New Zealand 2 - Emergency Level 2 - 10 minutes
Triage Scale of Australia) 3 - Urgent Level 3 - 30 minutes
4 - Semi-urgent Level 4 - 60 minutes
5 - Nonurgent Level 5 - 120 minutes

Manchester England 1 - Immediate (red) Level 1 - 0 minutes
Scotland 2 - Very urgent (orange) Level 2 - 10 minutes
3 - Urgent (yellow) Level 3 - 60 minutes
4 - Standard (green) Level 4 - 120 minutes
5 - Nonurgent (blue) Level 5 - 240 minutes

Canadian Triage and Acuity Scale Canada 1 - Resuscitation Level 1 - 0 minutes
(CTAS) 2 - Emergent Level 2 - 15 minute
3 - Urgent Level 3 - 30 minutes
4 - Less urgent Level 4 - 60 minutes
5 - Nonurgent Level 5 - 120 minutes

_(Australasian College for Emergency Medicine, 2002; Canadian Association of Emergency Physicians, 2002;_
_Manchester Triage Group, 1997)_


-----

accomplish a second goal, not just patient sorting
but also patient streaming: Getting the right patient
to the right resources at the right place and at the
right time.

Version 1 (v. 1) of the ESI was originally
implemented at two university-based EDs in the
spring of 1999. By the fall of 2000, the ESI was
revised with input from ED clinicians to include
pediatric patient triage criteria, and then version 2
(v. 2) was implemented in five additional hospitals
(including non-university teaching and community
settings). Based on feedback from nurses and
physicians using the ESI at these sites, along with
the best available scientific evidence, the ESI was
further refined as version 3 (v. 3) in 2001 (Wuerz et
al., 2001). Recent work has led to additional
revisions to the tool, which is introduced in this
edition of the ESI handbook as version 4 (v. 4)
(Tanabe et al., in press).

Emergency physicians and nurses in the United
States and Canada have conducted several research
studies in which the reliability and validity of the
ESI has been assessed. The ESI has been directly
compared to conventional three-level triage and to
the five-level CTAS. These studies will be described
later in the chapter. Like the Australasian, Canadian
and U.K. scales, ESI triage has five levels. However, it
is different in both its conceptual approach and
practical application. The underlying assumption of
the triage scales from Australia, Canada and the U.K.
is that the purpose of triage is to determine how
long the patient can wait for care in the ED. Clear
definitions of time to physician evaluation are an
integral part of both algorithms. This represents a
major difference between ESI and CTAS and the ATS.
ESI does not define expected time intervals to
physician evaluation.

The ESI is unique in that it also requires the triage
nurse to anticipate expected resource needs (e.g.,
diagnostic tests and procedures), in addition to
acuity, to determine a triage category for less acute
patients. The ESI triage levels are outlined in Figure
2-1. The process of categorizing ED patients using
the ESI will be described in detail in subsequent
chapters. Briefly, acuity judgments are addressed first
based on the stability of the patient's vital functions
and the likelihood of an immediate life or organ
threat. Then expected resource needs are addressed
for stable patients based on the experienced triage
nurse's prediction of the resources needed to get the
patient to an emergency department disposition.
Resource needs can range from none to two or
more.

|A patient dying?|yes|
|---|---|
|||

|D vital signs|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


##### Research on the Emergency Severity Index

In a pilot study of ESI v.1 ratings for 493 triage
encounters at two Boston hospitals in 1998,
researchers found that the system was both valid
and reliable (Wuerz et al., 2000). The patients were
triaged simultaneously by the triage nurse using the
traditional three-level scale and by the research
nurse who used the initial version of the ESI. Then,
an investigator triaged the patients again using the
ESI. The investigator was blinded to the research
nurses' ESI rating, and used only the written triage
note to make the triage decision. Triage levels were
strongly associated with resources used in the ED
and with outcomes such as hospitalization. Higher
acuity patients (ESI levels 1 and 2) consumed more
resources and were more likely to be admitted to the
hospital than low resource patients (ESI levels 4 and
5). Interrater reliability between the research nurse
and the investigator was found to be good, with 77
percent exact agreements and 22 percent within one
triage level.


-----

The reliability of the ESI has been evaluated in
several studies, using the kappa statistic to measure
inter-rater reliability. Kappas can range from 0 (no
agreement) to 1 (perfect agreement). At one of the
two original ESI sites, a time series design was used
to compare the reliability of triage ratings using a
three-level scale, then ESI v.1 was implemented and
triage ratings were re-examined (Travers et al., 2002).
Reliability improved from a weighted kappa of 0.53
for the three-level system to 0.68 for the five-level
ESI. In another study, researchers examined the
reliability and validity of ESI v.2 during and after
implementation of the system into triage practice at
seven hospitals in the northeast and southeast.
During the ESI triage education program, more than
200 triage nurses at the seven sites were asked to rate
40 case studies using the ESI (Eitel et al., 2003). The
study results indicated substantial interrater
reliability with kappas ranging from 0.70 to 0.80.
Three hundred eighty-six triage decisions on actual
patients were also evaluated and found to have high
interrater reliability, with weighted kappas ranging
from 0.69 to 0.87. In another study at a Midwestern,
urban ED, researchers evaluated the reliability of the
ESI v.3 for 403 actual patient triages and found a
kappa of 0.89 (Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou &
Adams, 2004).

Canadian and American researchers have also
directly compared the inter-rater reliability of the ESI
and the CTAS in a randomized trial (Worster et al.,
2004). They studied the triage assignments of ten
Canadian triage nurses experienced with CTAS. The
nurses were randomly assigned to initial ESI v.3 or
CTAS refresher training, and then rated 200 case
studies with the ESI or CTAS, respectively. Both
groups had excellent inter-rater reliability, with
kappas of 0.89 (ESI) and 0.91 (CTAS).

The validity of the ESI has been evaluated by
examination of outcomes for several thousand
patients. The studies found consistent, strong
correlations of the ESI with hospitalization, ED
length of stay, and mortality (Eitel et al., 2003;
Tanabe, et al., 2004; Wuerz, 2001; Wuerz et al.,
2001). The ESI has also been found to have
moderate correlations with physician evaluation and
management codes and nursing workload measures
(Travers et al., 2002). The ESI has been shown to
facilitate meaningful comparisons of case mix
between hospitals. A stratified random sample of
200 patients was selected from each of the seven
initial ESI hospitals, and case mix was compared
(Eitel et al., 2003). As expected, there was a higher


percentage of high acuity patients at the tertiary care
centers, compared with a higher percentage of low
resource patients at the community hospitals.

In a survey of nursing staff at the two original
university teaching hospitals, responses to the
implementation of the ESI were positive (Wuerz et
al., 2001). The nurses reported that the ESI was
easier to use and more useful in prioritizing patients
for treatment than the former three-level systems in
use at the two sites.

In the most recent study of the ESI, the validity of
ESI level 2 was examined in detail (Tanabe et al., in
press). In an evaluation of outcomes for 571 ESI
level-2 patients at five hospitals, it was found that
20 percent of level-2 patients received immediate,
life-saving interventions. The authors concluded
that such patients would benefit from being
classified as ESI level 1. The updated ESI v. 4
presented in later chapters of this book reflects the
revisions made to the ESI based upon this recent
study.

##### Benefits of the Emergency Severity Index

To date, the ESI has been implemented by hospitals
in different regions of the country, by university and
community hospitals, and by teaching and nonteaching sites. The ED clinicians, managers and
researchers at those sites have identified several
benefits of ESI triage over conventional three-level
scales. One benefit of the ESI is the rapid
identification of patients that need immediate
attention. The focus of ESI triage is on quick sorting
of patients in the setting of constrained resources. In
part, ESI triage returns to the fundamental purpose
of triage as it was originally defined in the days of
Napoleon's army. ESI triage is a rapid sorting into
five groups with clinically meaningful differences in
projected resource needs and therefore, associated
operational needs. Use of the ESI for this rapid
sorting can lead to improved flow of patients
through the ED. Once an ESI triage level is assigned,
the patient can be directed to a more complete
assessment, registration, initial treatment, or waiting
based on their acuity and their presumed resource
needs. For example, level-1 and 2 patients can be
taken directly to the treatment area for rapid
evaluation and treatment, while level-4 and 5
patients can go to registration and then be sent to
the waiting room to await an available bed.


-----

An important issue that is independent of ESI triage
is the timing of the complete nursing assessment.
Many believe that a complete assessment need not
be done at the initial triage station, but rather can
occur in the main treatment area or secondary triage
area as appropriate to the needs of each patient and
the current activity level of the ED (Gilboy et al.,
1999). Only the assessment necessary to make an
ESI assignment is required at triage in order to
facilitate the initial sorting of patients.
Comprehensive clinical assessments take significant
time to complete and, when done at triage, can
delay care and reduce satisfaction for patients with
more minor emergencies. With increasing patient
volumes and complexity contributing to ED
overcrowding, it is time to reconsider conventional
processes of care to increase efficiency and
effectiveness. However, it is always important to
gain sufficient information to be able to determine
the correct triage category. This is especially true
when waits are long to see the physician, as is
frequently the case with increased volumes. Triage
has become even more crucial with extended
waiting room times. Assignment of an inappropriate
low triage category can increase the risk of a bad
outcome due to the associated long wait.

Other benefits of the ESI include discrimination of
patients who do not need to be seen in the main
ED, but could safely and more efficiently be seen in
a fast-track or urgent care center. For example, in
many hospitals, the triage policy stipulates that all
ESI level 4 and 5 patients can be sent to either the
medical urgent care or minor trauma areas of the
ED. The triage policy also allows for some level-3
patients to be sent to urgent care (UC), such as
patients needing simple migraine headache
treatment. ESI level-3 patients triaged to UC and all
patients sent to the acute area from UC for more
serious conditions are monitored in the quality
improvement program. Nurses using the ESI have
reported that the tool facilitates communication of
patient acuity more effectively than the former
three-level triage scales used at the sites (Wuerz et
al., 2001). For example, the triage nurse can tell the
charge nurse, “I need a bed for a level 2 patient,”
and through this common language, the charge
nurse understands what is needed without a detailed
explanation of the patient by the triage nurse.

The ESI has also been used as the foundation for ED
policies that address specific populations. For
example, the psychiatric service at one site is


expected to provide consults for level 2 and 3
patients within 30 minutes and for level 4 and 5
patients within one hour of notification. At another
site, the ESI has been incorporated into a policy for
patients greater than 20-weeks pregnant who
present to the ED. Patients rated at ESI levels 1 and 2
are treated in the ED by emergency medicine with
an obstetrical consult. Those rated 3, 4, or 5 are
triaged to the labor and delivery area of the hospital.

The ESI is also a useful tool for determination of
thresholds for diversion of ambulance patients from
the ED. The ED Diversion Policy and Guidelines at
Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston defines
maximum capacity as 100 percent of RN-staffed ED
beds occupied. ESI is used to determine overcapacity.

Research has shown that the ESI is a reliable, valid
tool for rating triage acuity. The system has been
adopted by a variety of EDs in different regions of
the United States and in both academic and
community settings. The participating hospitals
have demonstrated the value of the ESI for
improved ED operations and patient care. Wider
adoption of the ESI by U.S. hospitals could lead to
the establishment of a standard for triage acuity
assessment, which will facilitate benchmarking,
public health surveillance and research.

##### References

American College of Emergency Physicians. (2003). ACEP
policy statements: triage scale standardization. Dallas
TX: Author. Retreived December, 2004, from
http://www.acep.org/1,33178,0.html

Australasian College for Emergency Medicine. (1994).
National triage scale. Emergency Medicine (Australia), 6,
145-146.

Australasian College for Emergency Medicine. (2002). The
Australasian triage scale (ATS). Retrieved July 17, 2002,
from http://www.acem.org.au/open/documents/
triage.htm

Barthell, E.N., Coonan, K., Finnell, J., Pollock, D., &
Cochrane, D. (2004). Disparate systems, disparate data:
integration, interfaces and standards in emergency
medicine information technology. Academic Emergency
_Medicine, 11(11), 1142-1148._

Beveridge, R., Ducharme, J., Janes, L., Beaulieu, S., &
Walter, S. (1999). Reliability of the Canadian
emergency department triage and acuity scale:
Interrater agreement. Annals of Emergency Medicine,
34(2), 155-159.


-----

### Chapter 3. Introduction to the Emergency Severity Index


The Emergency Severity Index (ESI) is a simple to
use, five-level triage instrument that categorizes
emergency department patients by evaluating both
patient acuity and resources. Initially the triage
nurse assesses only acuity level. If a patient does not
meet high acuity level criteria (ESI level 1 or 2), the
triage nurse then evaluates expected resource needs
to help determine a triage level (ESI level 3, 4, or 5).
Inclusion of resource needs in the triage rating is a
unique feature of the ESI in comparison with other
triage systems. Acuity is determined by the stability
of vital functions and potential for life, limb, or
organ threat. The triage nurse estimates resource
needs based on previous experience with patients
presenting with similar injuries or complaints.
Resource needs are defined as the number of
resources a patient is expected to consume in order
for a disposition decision to be reached. Once
appropriately oriented to the algorithm, the triage
nurse will be able to rapidly and accurately triage
patients into one of five explicitly defined and
mutually exclusive levels. The ESI provides
emergency departments with a valid, reliable triage
system (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy & Wuerz,
2003; Travers, Waller, Bowling, Flowers & Tintinalli,
2002; Wuerz, Travers, Gilboy, Eitel, Rosenau &
Yazhari, 2001; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, Kyriacou, &
Adams, 2004; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold, & Adams,
2004).

In this chapter, we present a step-by-step description
of how to triage with the ESI algorithm. Subsequent
chapters explain key concepts in more detail and
provide numerous examples to clarify the finer
points of ESI application.

Algorithms are frequently used in emergency care.
Most emergency clinicians are familiar with the
algorithms used in courses such as Basic Life
Support, Advanced Cardiac Life Support, and the
Trauma Nursing Core Course. These courses present
a step-by-step approach to clinical decision making
that the clinician is able to internalize with practice.
Each step of the algorithm tells the user what
questions to ask or what information to gather.
Based on the data or answers obtained, a decision is
made and the algorithm directs the user to the next
step, and ultimately to an outcome.

Triage with the ESI algorithm requires the
experienced ED nurse to start at the top of the


algorithm. A conceptual overview of the ESI
algorithm is presented in Figure 3-1 to illustrate the
major ESI decision points. The actual ESI algorithm
is described in detail later in this chapter (Figure
3-1a). The algorithm uses four decision points (A, B,
C, and D) to sort patients into one of the five triage
levels (Figure 3-1). With practice, the triage nurse
will be able to rapidly move from one ESI decision
point to the next.

**Figure 3-1. Emergency Severity Index Conceptual**
**Algorithm, v. 4**

**A** _yes_

**patient dying?** **_1_**

_no_

**B** _yes_

**shouldn’t wait?**

_no_

**C**

**how many resources?**

###### 2

**none** **one** **many**

###### 5 4 D consider

**vital signs**

_no_

###### 3

_©ESI Triage Research Team, 2004. Reproduced with_
_permission._

The four decision points depicted in the conceptual
algorithm (Figure 3-1) are critical to accurate and
reliable application of ESI. Figure 3-1 shows the four
decision points reduced to four key questions:

A. Is this patient dying?

B. Is this a patient who shouldn't wait?

|A patient dying?|yes|
|---|---|
|||

|D vital signs|Col2|
|---|---|
|||


-----

|AA requires immediate life-saving intervention?|yes|
|---|---|
|||

|ne o|ne m|
|---|---|

|Resources|Not Resources|
|---|---|
|• Labs (blood, urine) • ECG, X-rays • CT-MRI-ultrasound-angiography|• History & physical (including pelvic) • Point-of-care testing|
|• IV fluids (hydration)|• Saline or heplock|
|• IV or IM or nebulized medications|• PO medications • Tetanus immunization • Prescription refills|
|• Specialty consultation|• Phone call to PCP|
|• Simple procedure =1 (lac repair, foley cath) • Complex procedure =2 (conscious sedation)|• Simple wound care (dressings, recheck) • Crutches, splints, slings|


C. How many resources will this patient need?

D. What are the patient's vital signs?

The answers to the questions guide the user to the
correct triage level.

##### Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?

Simply stated, at decision point A (Figure 3-2) the
triage nurse asks if this patient is dying. If the
answer is “yes,” the triage process is complete and
the patient is automatically triaged as ESI level 1. A
“no” answer moves the user to the next step in the
algorithm, decision point B.


**Figure 3-2. Decision Point A: Is the Patient Dying?**

**AA**
**life-saving intervention?requires immediate** **_yes_** **_1_**

**_no_**

The following question is used to determine
whether the patient is dying (conceptual algorithm):
Does the patient require immediate life-saving
intervention? The following questions are helpful in
determining whether the patient meets level-1
criteria:

|AA requires immediate life-saving intervention?|yes|
|---|---|
|||


-----

- Does the patient require an immediate airway,
medication, or other hemodynamic
intervention?

- Does the patient meet any of the following
criteria: already intubated, apneic, pulseless,
severe respiratory distress, SpO2 < 90 percent,
acute mental status changes, or unresponsive?

Research has demonstrated that the triage nurse is
able to accurately predict the need for immediate
interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Table 3-1 lists
interventions that are considered life saving and
those that are not, for the purposes of ESI triage.

Interventions not considered life saving include
some interventions that are diagnostic or
therapeutic, but none that would “save a life.” Lifesaving interventions are aimed at securing an
airway, maintaining breathing, or supporting
circulation. Listed below are additional questions


that may be helpful in determining whether the
patient requires a life-saving intervention.

- Does this patient have a patent airway?

- Is the patient breathing?

- Does the patient have a pulse?

- Is the nurse concerned about the pulse rate,
rhythm, and quality?

- Was this patient intubated pre-hospital because
of concerns about the patient's ability to
maintain a patent airway, spontaneously breathe,
or maintain oxygen saturation?

- Is the nurse concerned about this patient's ability
to deliver adequate oxygen to the tissues?

The ESI level-1 patient always presents to the
emergency department with an unstable condition.
Because the patient could die without immediate


-----

care a team response is initiated; the physician is at
the bedside, and nursing is providing intensive care.
ESI level-1 patients are seen immediately because
timeliness of interventions can affect morbidity and
mortality.

Immediate physician involvement in the care of the
patient is a key difference between ESI level-1 and 2
patients. Level-1 patients are critically ill and require
immediate physician evaluation and interventions.
Conversely, while level-2 patients are also very ill,
the emergency nurse can initiate care through
protocols without a physician at the bedside. The
nurse recognizes that the patient needs
interventions but is confident that the patient's
clinical condition will not deteriorate. The
emergency nurse can initiate intravenous access,
administer supplemental oxygen, obtain an ECG,
and place the patient on a cardiac monitor, all
before a physician presence is needed.

When considering the need for immediate lifesaving interventions, the triage nurse also carefully
evaluates the patients' respiratory status and oxygen
saturation (SpO2). A patient in severe respiratory
distress or with an SpO2 < 90 percent may still be
breathing, but is in need of immediate intervention
to maintain an airway and oxygenation status. This
is the patient who will require the physician in the
room ordering medications such as those used for
rapid sequence intubation or preparing for other
interventions for airway and breathing.

Patients with chest pain must also be evaluated
using the same criteria. Some patients presenting
with chest pain are very stable. Although they may
require a diagnostic ECG, these patients do not meet
level-1 criteria. However, patients who are pale,
diaphoretic, in acute respiratory distress or
hemodynamically unstable will require immediate
life-saving interventions and do meet level-1 criteria.
Each patient with chest pain must still be evaluated
within the context of the level-1 criteria to
determine whether the patient requires an
immediate life-saving intervention.

When determining whether the patient requires
immediate life-saving intervention, the triage nurse
must also assess the patient's level of consciousness.
The ESI algorithm uses the AVPU (alert, verbal, pain,
unresponsive) scale, (see Table 3-2). The goal for this
part of the algorithm is to identify the patient who
has an acute change in level of consciousness. The
triage nurse needs to assess this patient for a change
from baseline and the critical concern is the
formerly alert patient who is now labeled a P (pain)


or U (unresponsive). Unresponsiveness is assessed in
the context of acute changes in neurological status,
not for the patient who has known developmental
delays, documented dementia, or aphasia. Any
patient who is unresponsive, including the
intoxicated patient unresponsive to painful stimuli
meets level-1 criteria and should receive immediate
evaluation. An example of an acute mental status
change that would require immediate intervention
would be a patient with decreased mental status
who is unable to maintain an airway or has severe
respiratory distress.

**Table 3-2 Four Levels of the AVPU Scale**

**AVPU**
**level** **Level of consciousness**

**A** Alert. The patient is alert, awake and
responds to voice. The patient is oriented
to time, place and person. The triage
nurse is able to obtain subjective
information.

**V** Verbal. The patient responds to verbal
stimuli by opening their eyes when
someone speaks to them. The patient is
not fully oriented to time, place, or
person.

**P** Painful. The patient does not respond to
voice, but does respond to a painful
stimulus, such as a squeeze to the hand
or sternal rub. A noxious stimulus is
needed to elicit a response.

**U** Unresponsive. The patient is nonverbal
and does not respond even when a
painful stimulus is applied

_Emergency Nurses Association, 2000._

Previous users of ESI version 3 (v. 3) will note a
major change in the ESI level-1 criteria. The key
difference between ESI v. 3 and ESI version 4 (v. 4) is
the identification and re-classification of some of the
sickest, previously ESI level-2 patients. Patients
requiring immediate life-saving intervention are
now classified as ESI level 1. In the previous ESI
version, a patient in severe respiratory distress who
required intubation but was still breathing was
categorized as ESI level 2. In the current version, this
patient meets level-1 criteria. Other examples of
patients now classified as ESI level 1 include a weak


-----

and dizzy patient with a heart rate of 30 or 200.
Although this change may not affect a large number
of patients, it will result in the accurate
categorization of the most acutely ill patients. Prior
to v. 4, triage nurses were frequently confronted
with two distinct levels of ESI level-2 patients;
patients who required immediate evaluation and
patients who could wait a brief time (10 minutes or
so) without clinical deterioration. This dilemma led
to a large, multi-center, prospective study that was
conducted to identify characteristics of ESI level-2
patients who actually received immediate
interventions (Tanabe et al., in press). Results from
that multicenter study were the impetus for
modifying the ESI system. This updated edition of
the ESI handbook presents the changes and
describes ESI v. 4.

An ESI level-1 patient is not always brought to the
emergency department by ambulance. The patient
with a drug overdose or acute alcohol intoxication
may be dropped at the front door. Children may be
brought by car and carried into the emergency
department. The experienced triage nurse is able to
instantly identify this critical patient. With a brief,
across-the-room assessment the triage nurse
recognizes the patient that is in extremis. This
patient is taken immediately to the treatment area
and resuscitation efforts are initiated.

Patients assessed as an ESI level 1 constitute
approximately 1 percent to 3 percent of all ED
patients (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz, Milne, Eitel,
Travers & Gilboy, 2000; Wuerz et al., 2001). Upon
arrival, the patient's condition requires immediate
resuscitation from either the emergency physician
and nurse or the trauma or code team. From ESI
research we know that most ESI level-1 patients are
admitted to intensive care units, while some die in
the emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz,
2001). A few ESI level-1 patients are discharged from
the ED, if they have a reversible change in level of
consciousness or vital functions such as
hypoglycemia, seizures, alcohol intoxication, or
anaphylaxis.

Examples of ESI level 1:

- Cardiac arrest.

- Respiratory arrest.

- Severe respiratory distress.

- SpO2 < 90.

- Critically injured trauma patient who presents
unresponsive.

- Overdose with a respiratory rate of 6.


Three broad questions are used to determine
whether the patient meets level-2 criteria.

1. Is this a high-risk situation?

2. Is the patient confused, lethargic or disoriented?

3. Is the patient in severe pain or distress?

The triage nurse obtains pertinent subjective and
objective information to quickly answer these
questions. A brief introduction to ESI level-2 criteria
is presented here, while a more detailed explanation
of patients who meet ESI level-2 criteria will be
presented in Chapter 4.



- Severe respiratory distress with agonal or gaspingtype respirations.

- Severe bradycardia or tachycardia with signs of
hypoperfusion.

- Hypotension with signs of hypoperfusion.

- Trauma patient who requires immediate
crystalloid and colloid resuscitation.

- Chest pain, pale, diaphoretic, blood pressure
70/palp.

- Weak and dizzy, heart rate = 30.

- Anaphylactic reaction.

- Baby that is flaccid.

- Unresponsive with strong odor of ETOH.

- Hypoglycemia with a change in mental status.

##### Decision Point B: Should the Patient Wait?

Once the triage nurse has determined that the
patient does not meet the criteria for ESI level 1, the
triage nurse moves to decision point B (see Figure 33). At decision point B the nurse needs to decide
whether this patient should wait to be seen. If the
patient should not wait, the patient is triaged as ESI
level 2. If the patient can wait, then the user moves
to the next step in the algorithm.


-----

###### Is This a High-risk Situation?

Based on a brief patient interview, gross
observations, and finally the “sixth sense” that
comes from experience, the triage nurse identifies
the patient who is high risk. Frequently the patient's
age and past medical history influence the triage
nurse's determination of risk. A high-risk patient is
one whose condition could easily deteriorate or a
patient who presents with symptoms suggestive of a
condition requiring time-sensitive treatment. This is
a patient who has a potential major life or organ
threat. A high-risk patient does not require a
detailed physical assessment or even a full set of
vital signs in most cases. The patient may describe a
clinical portrait that the experienced triage nurse
recognizes as a high-risk situation. An example of
such a portrait is the patient who states, “I never get
headaches and I lifted this heavy piece of furniture
and now I have the worst headache of my life.” The
triage nurse would triage this patient as ESI level 2
because the symptoms suggest the possibility of a
subarachnoid hemorrhage.

When the patient is an ESI level 2, the triage nurse
has determined that it would be unsafe for the
patient to remain in the waiting room for any
length of time. While ESI does not suggest specific
time intervals, ESI level-2 patients remain a high
priority and generally placement and treatment
should be initiated within 10 minutes of arrival. It is
important to remember that while the level-1
criteria have expanded with v. 4 of the algorithm,
ESI level-2 patients are still considered very ill and at
high risk. The need for care is immediate and an
appropriate bed needs to be found. Usually, rather
than move to the next patient, the triage nurse feels
that this patient is so sick that the charge nurse or
staff in the patient care area should be immediately
alerted that they have an ESI level 2.

Examples of high-risk situations:

- Active chest pain, suspicious for coronary
syndrome, but does not require an immediate
life-saving intervention, stable.

- A needle stick in a health care worker.

- Signs of a stroke, but does not meet level-1
criteria.

- A rule-out ectopic pregnancy, hemodynamically
stable.



- A patient on chemotherapy, and therefore
immunocompromised, with a fever.

- A suicidal or homicidal patient.

Chapter 4 contains additional information on highrisk situations.

###### Is the Patient Confused, Lethargic, or Disoriented?

This is the second question to be asked at decision
point B. Again the concern is whether the patient is
demonstrating an acute change in level of
consciousness. Patients with a baseline mental status
of confusion do not meet level-2 criteria.

- Confused: Inappropriate response to stimuli,
decrease in attention span and memory.

- Lethargic: Drowsy, sleeping more than usual,
responds appropriately when stimulated.

- Disoriented: The patient is unable to answer
questions correctly about time, place or person.

Examples of patients who are confused, lethargic, or
disoriented:

- New onset of confusion in an elderly patient.

- The 3-month-old whose mother reports the child
is sleeping all the time.

- The adolescent found confused and disoriented.

Each of these examples indicates that the brain may
be either structurally or chemically compromised.

###### Is This Patient in Severe Pain or Distress?

The third question the triage nurse needs to answer
at decision point B is whether this patient is
currently in pain or distress. If the answer is “no,”
the triage nurse is able to move to the next step in
the algorithm. If the answer is “yes,” the triage nurse
needs to assess the level of pain or distress. This is
determined by clinical observation and/or a selfreported pain rating of 7 or higher on a scale of 0 to
10. When patients report pain ratings of 7/10 or
greater, the triage nurse may triage the patient as ESI
level 2, but is not required to assign a level-2 rating.
Pain is one of the most common reasons for an ED
visit and clearly all patients reporting pain 7/10 or
greater do not need to be assigned an ESI level-2
triage rating. A patient with a sprained ankle and


-----

pain of 8/10 is a good example of an ESI level-4
patient. It is not necessary to rate this patient as a
level 2 based on pain alone.

In some patients, pain can be assessed by clinical
observation: distressed facial expression, diaphoresis,
body posture, and changes in vital signs. The triage
nurse observes physical responses to acute pain that
support the patient's rating. For example, the patient
with abdominal pain who is diaphoretic,
tachycardic, and has an elevated blood pressure; or
the patient with severe flank pain, vomiting, pale
skin, and a history of renal colic are both good
examples of patients that meet ESI level-2 criteria.
Chapter 4 provides additional information on ESI
level 2 and pain.

Severe distress can be physiological or psychological.
Examples of distress include the sexual assault
victim, the combative patient, or the bipolar patient
who is currently manic.

ESI level-2 patients constitute a relatively low
volume, high-risk group that comprise 20 percent to
30 percent of emergency department patients
(Travers et al., 2002; Wuerz et al., 2001, Tanabe,
Gimbel et al., 2004). Once an ESI level-2 patient is
identified, the triage nurse needs to ensure that the
patient is cared for in a timely manner. Registration
can be completed by a family member or at the
bedside. ESI level-2 patients need vital signs and a
comprehensive nursing assessment but not
necessarily at triage. Placement should not be
delayed to finish obtaining vital signs. ESI research
has shown that 50 to 60 percent of ESI level-2
patients are admitted from the ED (Wuerz et al.,
2001).

##### Decision Point C: Resource Needs

If the answers to the questions at the first two
decision points are “no,” then the triage nurse
moves to decision point C (see Figure 3-4). The
triage nurse should ask, “How many different
resources do you think this patient is going to
consume in order for the physician to reach a
disposition decision?” The disposition decision
could be to send the patient home, admit to the
observation unit, admit to the hospital, or even to
transfer to another institution. This decision point
again requires the triage nurse to draw from past


experiences in caring for similar emergency
department patients. ED nurses need to clearly
understand that the estimate of resources has to do
with standards of care and is independent of type of
hospital (i.e., teaching or non-teaching) and
location. A patient presenting to any emergency
department should consume the same general
resources in order for a disposition to be reached.
Considering the patient's brief subjective and
objective assessment, past medical history, allergies,
medications, age, and gender, how many different
resources will be used in order for the physician to
reach a disposition? In other words, what is typically
done for the patient who presents to the emergency
department with this common complaint? The
triage nurse is asked to do this based on his or her
assessment of the patient and should not consider
individual practice patterns, but rather the routine
practice in the particular ED.

**Figure 3-4. Resource Prediction**

**C**

**how many different resources are needed?**

**none** **one** **many**

To identify resource needs the triage nurse must be
familiar with emergency department standards of
care. The triage nurse must be knowledgeable about
the concept of “prudent and customary.” One easy
way to think about this concept is to ask the
question “Given this patient's chief complaint or
injury, what resources is the emergency physician
likely to utilize?” Resources can be hospital services,
tests, procedures, consults or interventions that are
above and beyond the physician history and
physical, or very simple emergency department
interventions such as applying a bandage. Further
explanations and examples are provided in Chapter 5.

A list of what is and what is not considered a
resource for purposes of ESI triage classification can
be found in Table 3-3. ESI level-3 patients are
predicted to require two or more resources; ESI level4 patients are predicted to require one resource; and
ESI level-5 patients are predicted to require no
resources (Table 3-4).


-----

Research has shown that ESI level-3 patients make
up 30 percent to 40 percent of patients seen in the
emergency department (Eitel et al., 2003; Wuerz et
al., 2001). They often require a more in-depth
evaluation but are felt to be stable in the short term,
and certainly may have a longer length of stay in
the ED. ESI level 4 and ESI level 5 make up between
20 percent and 35 percent of ED volume, perhaps
even more in a community with poor primary care
access. Appropriately trained mid-level providers
with the right skills mix could care for these patients
in a fast-track or express care setting, recognizing
that a high proportion of these patients have a
trauma-related presenting complaint. Since their
physical condition is stable, these patients could
safely wait several hours to be seen.


-----

##### Decision Point D:The Patient's Vital Signs

Before assigning a patient to ESI level 3, the nurse
needs to look at the patient's vital signs and decide
whether they are outside the accepted parameters
for age and are felt by the nurse to be meaningful. If
the vital signs are outside accepted parameters, the
triage nurse should consider upgrading the triage
level to ESI level 2. However, it is the triage nurse’s
decision as to whether or not the patient should be
upgraded to an ESI level 2 based on vital sign
abnormalities. This is decision point D.

Vital sign parameters are outlined by age (see Figure
3-5). The vital signs used are pulse, respiratory rate,
and oxygen saturation and, for any child under age
three, body temperature. Using the vital sign criteria,
the triage nurse can upgrade an adult patient who
presents with a heart rate of 104, or this patient can
remain ESI level 3. A 6-month-old baby with a cold
and a respiratory rate of 48 could be triaged ESI level
2 or 3. Based on the patient's history and physical
assessment, the nurse must ask if the vital signs are
enough of a concern to say that the patient is high
risk and cannot wait to be seen. Chapter 6 explains
vital signs in detail and gives examples.


Temperature is only included with children under
age three. Significant fever may exclude young
children from categories 4 and 5. This will help
identify potentially bacteremic children and avoid
sending them to a fast track setting or waiting a
prolonged time. Pediatric fever guidelines will be
described in detail in Chapter 6.

###### Does Time to Treatment Influence ESI Triage Categories?

An estimate of how long the patient can wait to be
seen by a physician is an important component of
most triage systems. The Australasian and Canadian
Triage Systems require patients to be seen by a
physician within a specific time period, based on
their triage category. ESI does not mandate specific
time standards in which patients must be evaluated
by a physician. However, patients who meet criteria
for ESI level 2 should be seen as soon as possible; it
is up to the individual institution to determine a
policy. Frequently, there may be confusion between
institutional policy and “flow or process of patient
care” and ESI triage level.

We will describe four patient scenarios in which
flow and triage category may seem to conflict. Often
trauma patients present to the triage nurse after
sustaining a significant mechanism of injury, such as
an unrestrained passenger in a high-speed motor
vehicle crash. The patient may have left the crash
scene in some way other than by ambulance, and
then presents to triage with localized right upper
quadrant pain with stable vital signs. This patient is
physiologically stable, walked into the ED and does
not meet ESI level-1 criteria. However, the patient is
at high risk for a liver laceration and other
significant trauma, so should be triaged as ESI level
2. Frequently, EDs have trauma policies and trauma
response level categorization that will require rapid
initiation of care. Triage and trauma response level
are both important and should be recorded as two
different scores. While the triage nurse recognizes
this is a physiologically stable trauma patient and
correctly assigns ESI level 2, she should facilitate
patient placement and trauma care as outlined by
the trauma policy. The patient is probably stable for
another 10 minutes and does not require immediate
life-saving interventions. If the same patient
presented with a blood pressure of 80 palpable, they
would be triaged as ESI level 1 and require
immediate hemodynamic, life-saving interventions.


-----

Another example of policies that may affect triage
level is triage of the patient with stable chest pain. If
the patient is physiologically stable but experiencing
chest pain that is potentially an acute coronary
syndrome, the patient meets ESI level-2 criteria.
They do not require immediate life-saving
interventions but they are a high-risk patient. Their
care is time-sensitive, an ECG should be performed
within 10 minutes of patient arrival. Often, EDs will
have a policy related to rapid initiation of an ECG.
While care of these patients should be rapidly
initiated, the ECG is not a life-saving intervention, it
is a diagnostic procedure. If the triage nurse were to
triage all chest pain patients as ESI level 1, it would
be difficult to prioritize the care for true ESI level-1
patients who require immediate life-saving
interventions. But the patient with chest pain who
presents to triage diaphoretic, with a blood pressure
of 80 palpable would meet ESI level-1 criteria.

The third example of time-sensitive care is patients
who present with signs of an acute stroke. Again, if
physiologically stable, a 10 minute wait to initiate
care will probably not further compromise the
patient. However, the patient with signs of stroke
that is unable to maintain an airway meets ESI level1 criteria.

Finally, a somewhat different scenario is an elderly
patient that fell, may have a fractured hip, arrives by
private car with family, and is in pain. The patient
does not really meet ESI level-2 criteria but is very
uncomfortable. The triage nurse would categorize
the patient as ESI level 3 and probably place the
patient in an available bed before other ESI level-3
patients. Ambulance patients may also present with
a similar scenario. Arriving by ambulance is not a
criterion to assign a patient ESI level 1 or 2. The ESI
criteria should always be used to determine triage
level without regard to method of arrival.

In general, care of ESI level-2 patients should be
rapidly facilitated and patients should ideally wait
no longer than 10 minutes to be placed in the
treatment area. It is important to remember that
while ESI v. 4 has expanded level-1 criteria to
include patients requiring immediate interventions
that were previously ESI level 2, all level-2 patients
are still potentially very ill and require rapid
initiation of care and evaluation. The triage nurse
has determined that it is unsafe for these patients to
wait. Patients may currently be stable, but also have
a condition that can easily deteriorate, and/or


initiation of diagnostic treatment may be time
sensitive (stable chest pain requires an ECG in 10
minutes of arrival), or the patient has a potential
major life or organ threat. ESI level-2 patients are
still considered to be very high risk.

In the current atmosphere of ED overcrowding, it is
not uncommon for the triage nurse to be in a
situation of triaging many ESI level-2 patients with
no open ED beds in which to place the patients. In
these situations, the triage nurse may be tempted to
“undertriage.” This can lead to serious, negative
patient outcomes and an under-representation of
the ED's overall case mix. When faced with multiple
ESI level-2 patients simultaneously, the triage nurse
must evaluate each patient according to the ESI
algorithm. Then, the nurse can “triage” all level-2
patients to determine which patient(s) are at highest
risk, in order to facilitate patient placement based on
this evaluation.

##### Summary

In summary, the ESI is a five-level triage system that
is simple to use and divides patients by acuity and
resource needs. The ESI triage algorithm is based on
four key decision points. The experienced ED RN
will be able to rapidly and accurately triage patients
using this system.

##### References

Eitel, D.R., Travers, D. A., Rosenau, A., Gilboy, N., &
Wuerz, R.C. (2003). The emergency severity index
version 2 is reliable and valid. Academic Emergency
_Medicine, 10(10), 1079-1080._

Emergency Nurses Association. (2000). In B.B. Jacobs and
K.S. Hoyt (Eds.), Trauma nursing core course (Provider
_manual) (5th ed.). Des Plaines, IL: Author._

Tanabe, P., Gimbel R, Yarnold P, Kyriacou D, & Adams, J.
(2004). Reliability and validity of scores on the
Emergency Severity Index version 3. Academic
_Emergency Medicine, 11:59-65._

Tanabe, P., Gimbel R, Yarnold P.R., & Adams, J. (2004).
The emergency severity index (v. 3) five level triage
system scores predict ED resource consumption.
_Journal of Emergency Nursing, 30:22-29._

Tanabe, P., Travers, D., Gilboy, N., Rosenau, A., Sierzega,
G., Rupp, V., et al. (in press). Refining Emergency
Severity Index (ESI) triage criteria, ESI v4. Academic
_Emergency Medicine._


-----

### Chapter 4. ESI Level 2

This chapter expands on the introduction to the ESI

**Figure 4-1. Patient Assessment**

offered in Chapter 3 and discusses in further detail
the decisionmaking process necessary to determine
which patients meet ESI level-2 criteria. Though the

**high risk situation?**

ESI level-2 rating may be seen as subjective, it is

**or**

based on the experienced ED nurse's sound clinical **confused/lethargic/disoriented?**
judgment. During the ESI triage educational **or**
program, a considerable amount of time should be **severe pain/distress?**
devoted to explaining which types of patients
should be categorized ESI level 2. In this chapter, we
highlight common patient presentations that meet
ESI level-2 criteria.


After the triage nurse has determined that the
patient does not require immediate life-saving
intervention, he or she must then decide whether
the patient should wait. When making this decision,
the triage nurse should consider the following
question “Would I use my last open bed for this
patient?” The following three questions listed in
Figure 4-1 should be answered and are key
components of ESI level-2 criteria:

1. Is this a high-risk situation?

2. Is the patient experiencing new onset confusion,
lethargy, or disorientation?

3. Is the patient experiencing severe pain or
distress?

The remainder of this chapter discusses the decision
points of ESI level 2 in detail. Many examples are
provided that are based on the potential medical
diagnoses associated with patients' chief complaints
and presenting symptoms. An experienced triage
nurse will always assess the patient's chief
complaint, presenting signs and symptoms,
demographics, and medical history to attempt to
identify a high-risk situation. While the purpose of
nurse triage is not to make a medical diagnosis,
these situations are based on the experienced triage
nurse's knowledge of possible medical diagnoses that
are associated with specific chief complaints. A good
source of information about the signs and
symptoms of various medical diagnoses is the
Emergency Nursing Core Curriculum[©] or other
emergency nursing textbooks. The following
discussion provides some selected examples of highrisk situations. This discussion is not intended to be
an exhaustive list. The examples are summarized in
Table 4-1.


Little has been written about how ED triage nurses
make decisions. Knowledge and experience are
necessary but not sufficient. The other factor that we
have found to be important is gut instinct or the
sixth sense. Novice triage nurses should be taught
rules of thumb which they can use until they have
the confidence and experience upon which to make
rapid, accurate decisions. Examples of these rules of
thumb include “all women of childbearing age are
pregnant until proven otherwise” or “all chest pain
is cardiac until proven otherwise.” Novice triage
nurses are also taught symptom clustering such as
the cardiac cluster of chest pain with nausea,
shortness of breath, and diaphoresis. From prior
clinical situations ED nurses put together what have
been referred to as clinical portraits. The nurse puts
into long-term memory particular patient scenarios
in which they were involved in some way. For
example, the patient with fever, stiff neck, and a
meningococcal rash will always come to mind when
a patient with a similar complaint presents to triage.
The triage nurse needs to draw on all of his or her
knowledge and experience with each triage
encounter. High-risk situations should be easy for
the experienced triage nurse to identify.

Vital signs are often not helpful in the identification
of high-risk patients. The patient typically presents


##### High-risk Situations

The ability to recognize a high-risk situation is a
critical element of the triage decisionmaking
process, regardless of the particular triage system
used. ESI highlights the importance of recognizing
high-risk situations and uses the triage nurse's
expertise and experience to identify patients at high
risk.


-----

to the ED with a chief complaint, signs and
symptoms, or history suggestive of a problem or
condition that is serious and, unless dealt with
promptly, can deteriorate rapidly. Often patient age,
past medical history, and current medications
influence the perceived severity of the chief
complaint. For example, a frail elderly patient with
severe abdominal pain is at a much higher risk of
morbidity and mortality than a 20-year-old. The
elderly patient with abdominal pain should be
classified as ESI level 2, while the 20-year-old with


stable vital signs will usually be classified as ESI level
3. It is common for the triage nurse to identify a
high-risk situation which may then be confirmed by
finding abnormal vital signs. For example, a patient
who complains of a fever and productive cough may
be found to have a respiratory rate of 32 and an
oxygen saturation of 90 percent. The experienced
triage nurse uses knowledge and expertise to
recognize that this patient probably has pneumonia,
is at risk for desaturating and is therefore high risk.
Inexperienced ED nurses are not likely to have the


-----

knowledge and expertise to consistently identify
high-risk situations and make accurate triage
decisions. For this reason, the inexperienced triage
nurse is, in fact, a liability at triage, regardless of the
particular triage system used. They have not
incorporated symptom clustering, clinical portraits,
or “gut instinct” into their practice; such approaches
are key in identifying the high-risk patient situation.
The next section will provide specific examples of
high-risk situations.

###### Abdominal and Gastrointestinal

Abdominal pain is a frequent chief complaint in the
ED. What makes it high risk? A good history and
assessment of current pain rating, respiratory rate,
and heart rate are important elements to consider
and will help determine the presence of a high-risk
situation. Pain rating is only one of many factors to
consider. Tachycardia or respiratory distress that
accompanies severe abdominal pain can represent
shock and would place the patient at high risk. The
elderly patient with severe abdominal pain presents
another potentially risky situation. Often the elderly
experience bowel obstructions, gastrointestinal
bleeds, and other abdominal complications
associated with significantly higher morbidity and
mortality than younger patients. Signs and
symptoms of an acute abdomen are important to
assess for in all patients with abdominal pain. How
long has the patient had the pain? What made the
patient come to the ED today? Has the patient had
severe nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea? Is the patient
dehydrated? Patients with severe “ripping”
abdominal pain radiating to the back should be
considered to potentially have an abdominal aortic
aneurysm. Patients describe the pain as severe,
constant, and sudden in onset and may have a
history of hypertension.

Patients with abdominal pain are often initially
considered ESI level 3 at the beginning of the triage
interview, and after the discovery of tachycardia or
other risk factors, the triage nurse may determine
that the patient is indeed high risk.

Vomiting blood or a chief complaint of blood per
rectum should be seriously considered and evaluated
in the context of vital signs. A 30-year-old with
bright red blood per rectum, normal vital signs, and
no other risk factors does not meet criteria for ESI
level 2. But the elderly patient who called an


ambulance because he started vomiting blood and
has a heart rate of 117 and a respiratory rate of 24 is
high risk and does meet ESI level-2 criteria.

###### Cardiovascular

Chest pain is also a very common chief complaint.
The presentation of acute coronary syndromes (ACS)
is not always specific, and it is sometimes difficult to
determine the risk of ACS at triage. Patients who
have an episode of chest or epigastric discomfort,
with or without accompanying symptoms, usually
will need an ECG performed rapidly to determine
the presence of ACS and need to be identified as
high risk-ESI level 2. It is important for the triage
nurse to incorporate into his or her knowledge of
women and presentational symptoms characteristic
of heart disease. The 54-year-old obese female who
presents to the ED with epigastric pain and fatigue is
at risk of ACS and should be assigned to ESI level 2high risk. Patients with chest pain that are
physiologically unstable and require immediate
intervention such as intubation or hemodynamic
support should be triaged as ESI level 1. All chest
pain patients do not meet level-1 or 2 criteria. For
example, a 20-year-old healthy patient with chest
pain, cough, and fever of 101° is at low risk for ACS
and does not meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria. Each
patient must be assessed individually. Other highrisk cardiovascular situations would include the
possibility of a hypertensive crisis, acute vascular
arterial occlusions, and patients who present with a
fever post valve replacement.

###### Dental, Ear, Nose, and Throat

Although less common, epiglottitis still exists and
represents a potential airway threat. Patients with a
peritonsilar abscess are another example of potential
airway compromise and both conditions represent a
high-risk situation. If a patient with either of these
complaints is in immediate danger of airway
compromise and requires immediate intervention,
level-1 criteria are met. For patients with epistaxis,
the triage nurse should obtain a blood pressure,
although this is not in the ESI algorithm. Epistaxis
could be caused by a posterior nosebleed due to a
hypertensive crisis, nose picking by the patient on
Coumadin®, or recent cocaine use. In any case, such
patients should be classified as ESI level 2, as they
represent a high-risk situation.


-----

###### Environmental

Patients with inhalation injuries should be
considered high risk for potential airway
compromise. If the patient presents with significant
airway distress and requires immediate intervention,
they meet level-1 criteria.

###### Facial

Patients with trauma to the face should be evaluated
for possible facial fractures. When present, facial
fractures are often associated with other severe
trauma and may potentially lead to airway
compromise and should therefore be triaged as high
risk. Facial trauma with actual airway compromise
should be triaged as ESI level 1 to facilitate airway
management High-risk of airway compromise
should be triaged as ESI level 2.

###### General Medical

There are several other general medical complaints
that need to be considered for possible high-risk
situations. These medical complications include
diabetic ketoacidosis, hyper- or hypoglycemia,
sepsis, complaints of syncope or near syncope, and a
variety of other electrolyte disturbances that may
need to be treated immediately. Hyperkalemia in
particular is a very high-risk situation that can lead
to serious cardiac dysrhythmias. Hyperkalemia
might be suspected in a renal dialysis patient
exhibiting weakness. Finally, oncology patients with
a fever who are undergoing chemotherapy are at risk
for sepsis and should be identified as high risk and
rapidly evaluated.

###### Genitourinary

Males with testicular torsion will complain of severe
pain, are easily recognized, and require rapid
evaluation and surgical intervention, in addition to
rapid pain control. Renal dialysis patients unable to
complete dialysis are another example of a high-risk
genitourinary emergency, since a variety of
electrolyte disturbances may be present. Females,
and more commonly males, can present to the
triage nurse with acute urinary retention. Males over
age 65 often present with benign prostatic
hypertrophy and the inability to urinate. Males and
females can present postoperatively with the
inability to void. These patients are in acute distress
and require emergency urinary catheterization.
These are examples of patients in severe distress who
should be categorized as ESI level 2.


###### Mental Health

Many patients that present with mental health
problems are at high risk if they are a danger either
to themselves, others, or the environment. Patients
who are suicidal, homicidal, psychotic, violent, or
present an elopement risk should be considered high
risk. Intoxication without signs of trauma or
associated risk of aspiration does not represent a
high-risk criterion. The intoxicated patient needs to
be carefully assessed for signs of trauma or
behavioral issues related to alcohol use or past
medical history. Either could represent a high-risk
situation and the patient would be categorized ESI
level 2.

###### Neurological

Patients with severe headache associated with
mental status changes, high blood pressure, lethargy,
fevers, or a rash should be considered high risk. Any
patient with sudden onset of speech deficits or
motor weakness should also be assigned ESI level 2.
Patients with these symptoms may be experiencing
an acute stroke and immediate evaluation is critical.
Time from onset of symptoms is a critical factor in
determining treatment options, in particular
fibrinolytic or other therapies. A patient with no
past medical history of headaches that presents to
the emergency department with the sudden onset of
a headache should be identified as high risk for a
subarrachnoid bleed. The patient will often describe
exactly what they were doing when the headache
began, typically after lifting, having a bowel
movement, or after sexual intercourse.

###### Obstetrical and Gynecological

Females with abdominal pain or vaginal bleeding
should be carefully assessed and vital signs obtained
if there is no obvious life threat. Pregnancy history
and last menstrual period should always be
ascertained from all females of childbearing age. The
triage nurse should assess for signs and symptoms of
the following conditions in late pregnancy: abruptio
placentae and placenta previa. In early pregnancy
the triage nurse should assess for signs and
symptoms of ectopic pregnancy and spontaneous
abortion. All pregnant patients 14 to 20 weeks and
over should be seen by a physician rapidly,
according to individual institutional policy. A
postpartum patient with a chief complaint of heavy
vaginal bleeding should also be seen by a physician
urgently. Any female patient, whether pregnant or


-----

postpartum, who presents with significant
hemodynamic instability and is in need of
immediate life-saving interventions should be
triaged as ESI level 1.

###### Ocular

Patients with trauma to the eye, sudden partial or
full loss of vision, or a chemical splash to the eye are
at high risk for permanent damage to the eye and
should be triaged at ESI level 2. Conditions
associated with some type of visual loss include
central retinal artery occlusion, acute narrow-angle
glaucoma, and retinal detachment. Trauma to the
eye can result in a globe rupture and hyphema.
Chemical splashes to the eye, particularly alkali,
necessitate immediate flushing to prevent further
damage to the cornea. All of these conditions
require immediate evaluation and treatment to
prevent further complications or deterioration.
These patients meet ESI level-2 criteria. While
immediate irrigation is necessary, it is not
considered life-saving and thus these patients do not
meet ESI level-1 criteria.

###### Orthopedic

Patients with signs and symptoms of compartment
syndrome are at high risk for extremity loss and
should be assigned ESI level 2. Other patients with
high-risk orthopedic injuries include any extremity
injury with compromised neurovascular function,
partial or complete amputations, or trauma
mechanisms identified as having a high-risk such as
serious acceleration or deceleration. Patients with
possible fractures of the pelvis, femur, or hip and
other extremity dislocations should be carefully
evaluated and vital signs considered. These fractures
can be associated with significant blood loss. Again,
the need for immediate life-saving intervention in
hemodynamically unstable patients will meet ESI
level-1 criteria.

###### Pediatrics

It is not uncommon for the triage nurse to be
uncomfortable when making triage acuity decisions
about children, especially infants. It is important to
obtain an accurate history from the caregiver and
evaluate the activity level of the child. The child
who is inconsolable or withdrawn may be at high
risk of serious illness. The following conditions are
examples of high-risk situations for children:

- Seizures.

- Sepsis, severe dehydration.



- Diabetic ketoacidosis.

- Child abuse, burns.

- Head trauma.

- Vitamins/iron or other overdoses/ingestions.

- Infant less than 28 days of age with a fever of
100.4° F or 38° C, or greater.

###### Transplant

Patients who are status post organ transplant are
usually ill and considered high risk. They can
present with organ rejection, sepsis, or other
complications. Patients who are on a transplant list
are also usually considered high risk.

###### Respiratory

There are many respiratory complaints that place
patients at high risk. Patients with mild-to-moderate
distress should be further evaluated for respiratory
rate and pulse oximetry to determine whether they
should be categorized ESI level 2. Patients in severe
respiratory distress that require immediate lifesaving intervention such as intubation meet level-1
criteria. The high-risk patient is one who is currently
ventilating and oxygenating adequately but is in
respiratory distress and has the potential to rapidly
deteriorate. Potential etiologies of respiratory distress
may include asthma, pulmonary embolus, pleural
effusion, pneumothorax, foreign body aspiration,
toxic smoke inhalation, or shortness of breath
associated with chest pain.

###### Toxicological

Most patients who present with an overdose should
be rapidly evaluated and represent a high-risk
situation. It is often difficult to determine which
drugs were taken and the quantities actually
consumed. If the patient has taken an intentional
overdose, and admits to suicidal ideation, this meets
criteria for a high-risk situation. A patient who is
apneic on arrival or requires other immediate lifesaving interventions should be categorized an ESI
level 1; all other admitted overdoses should be
considered ESI level 2.

###### Trauma

Frequently, patients who have been involved in a
traumatic event are at high risk for injury, although
no obvious injuries may be apparent. Any
mechanism of injury associated with a high risk of
injury should be categorized ESI level 2, unless they


-----

present with unstable vital signs and require
immediate intervention. These patients should be
triaged as ESI level 1. Serious injury results from the
transfer of mechanical or kinetic energy and is
caused by acceleration forces, deceleration forces, or
both. Motor vehicle and motorcycle crashes, victims
of falls, and gunshot and stab wounds are examples
of blunt and penetrating trauma, which should be
assessed carefully for potential for serious injury. The
triage nurse should obtain the following details
regarding the injury: age of the patient, pre-existing
conditions of the patient and environment, distance
the patient fell or jumped, how fast the vehicle was
moving, history of loss of consciousness, location of
penetrating injury, and type of weapon. Again, the
nurse will draw from his or her knowledge of
biomechanics and mechanism of injury to assess the
patient and decide whether they meet ESI level-2
criteria. Gunshot wounds to the head, neck, chest,
or groin usually require trauma team evaluation and
immediate interventions and should be triaged as
ESI level 1.

###### Wound Management

What makes a wound high risk? Is there
uncontrolled bleeding? Is there arterial bleeding? Is
this a partial amputation? How was the wound
sustained and does the mechanism of injury leave
the patient at high risk for other traumatic
complications? Most wounds do not meet the
criteria for ESI level 2. A patient with a stab wound
to the subcutaneous tissue of the thigh with
controlled bleeding and good distal neurological
function can be classified as ESI level 4. Any
uncontrolled bleeding that requires immediate lifesaving intervention to stabilize the patient meets
level-1 criteria.

##### Confusion/Lethargy/ Disorientation

The second question to consider when determining
whether a patient meets level-2 criteria is “Does the
patient have new onset confusion, lethargy, or
disorientation?” Altered mental status is another
frequent chief complaint. Family members, friends,
or paramedics may accompany these patients to the
ED. At decision point B of the ESI algorithm, the
presence of confusion, lethargy, or disorientation
refers to new onset or an acute alteration in level of
consciousness (LOC). Chronic dementia and
confusion do not meet criteria for ESI level 2.
Confusion, lethargy, or disorientation may be caused


by a variety of serious medical conditions including
stroke, transient ischemic attack, and other
structural pathology to the brain, metabolic, and
electrolyte imbalances such as hypoglycemia or
hyponatremia and toxicological conditions.

This portion of the algorithm is usually very clear
and leaves very little open to interpretation. If the
patient's history is unknown and the patient
presents to triage confused, lethargic or disoriented,
the triage nurse should assume this condition is new
and select ESI level 2 as the triage category. Again, if
the patient has new onset confusion, lethargy or
disorientation and requires an immediate life-saving
intervention as previously described, the patient
then meets ESI level-1 criteria.

##### Severe Pain/Distress

The final question to address when determining
whether the patient meets level-2 criteria is “Does
the patient have severe pain or distress?” The patient
should be assessed for the presence of severe pain or
distress. All patients who have a pain rating of 7/10
or greater should be considered for meeting ESI level2 criteria.

_Considered is a very important word. It is up to the_
discretion of the triage nurse to determine whether
the clinical condition and pain rating in
combination warrant a rating of ESI level 2. For
example, a patient who had a heavy metal object
fall on his toe may rate the pain a 10/10. Indeed, the
patient may have a fracture and is experiencing
severe pain. The patient probably has done nothing
to try to relieve the pain prior to arrival in the ED.
The correct triage level for this patient would be ESI
level 4. Only one resource will be needed (an x-ray).
The triage nurse should implement comfort
measures at triage including ice, elevation, and
analgesics (if standing orders are in place) to reduce
the pain. The triage nurse should believe the
patient's pain is 10/10 and address the pain at triage.
However, this patient can wait to be seen and you
would certainly not use your last open bed for this
patient. In summary, the triage nurse assesses not
only the pain intensity rating provided by the
patient, but also the chief complaint, past medical
history and physiologic appearance of the patient
when determining a triage category. Examples of
patients for whom the triage nurse could use severe
pain criteria to justify an ESI level-2 rating include:

- A patient with 10/10 flank pain who is writhing
at triage.


-----

- An 80-year-old female with 7/10 generalized
abdominal pain with severe nausea.

- A 30-year-old patient in acute sickle cell pain
crisis.

- An oncology patient with severe pain.

- Any full- or partial-thickness burn that will
require immediate pain control.

All ED patients are to be assessed for pain and asked
to rate their pain using a scale such as the visual
analog scale. Many triage nurses are uncomfortable
with documenting a patients pain rating and then
having them wait to be seen. It is important for the
triage nurse to understand that the patients self
reported pain rating is only one piece of the pain
assessment. For example, all ED triage nurses have
triaged patients who are laughing, talking on their
cell phone or eating chips but report their pain is
10+. Triage nurses should assign ESI level 2 if the
patient reports a pain rating of 7/10 or greater and
the triage nurse's subjective and objective assessment
confirms that the patient's pain requires
interventions that are beyond the scope of triage.
The triage nurse concludes that it would be
inappropriate for this patient to wait and they
would assign this patient to the last open bed.

Finally, in determining whether a patient meets ESI
level-2 criteria, the triage nurse must assess for severe
distress, which is defined as either physiological or
psychological. In addition to pain, patients
experiencing severe respiratory distress meet criteria


for ESI level 2 for physiological disturbances.
Examples of severe psychological distress include
patients who are:

- Distraught after experiencing a sexual assault.

- Exhibiting behavioral outbursts at triage.

- Combative.

- Victims of domestic violence.

- Experiencing an acute grief reaction.

These are patients that the triage nurse usually
prefers to have placed in the treatment area
immediately so as to have the patient avoid the
waiting room.

##### Summary

We have reviewed the key components and
questions that need to be answered to determine
whether a patient meets ESI level-2 criteria. It is
critical that the triage nurse consider these questions
as he or she triages each patient. “Missing” a highrisk situation may result in an extended waiting
period and potentially negative patient outcomes.

##### Reference

Emergency Nurses Association. (2001). Making the right
_decision: a triage curriculum (2nd ed.). Des Plaines, IL:_
Author.


-----

### Chapter 5. Expected Resource Needs


Traditionally, triage systems have been based solely
upon the acuity of the patient. Such systems require
the nurse to assign an acuity level by making a
judgment about how long the patient can wait to be
seen by a provider. The Emergency Severity Index
(ESI) triage system uses a novel approach to triage
level assignment by including not only judgments
about who should be seen first, but also for the less
acute patients, adding predictions of the resources
that are likely to be used to make a disposition for
the patient. This chapter includes background
information on why resource predictions were
included in the ESI and a description of what
constitutes a resource. Also included are examples of
patients rated ESI level 3 to 5 and the resources that
each patient is predicted to need.

Historically, comprehensive triage has been the
dominant model for triage acuity assignment in U.S.
emergency departments (Emergency Nurses
Association [ENA], 1997, p. 3-10; Gilboy, Travers &
Wuerz, 1999). Triage systems have been based on
the nurse’s assessment of vital signs, subjective and
objective information, past medical history, allergies,
and medications to determine triage acuity.

Resource prediction is an integral part of the ESI for
patients identified as ESI level 3, 4, or 5. It is
important to understand that resource allocation
does not have a role for patients of high acuity, e.g.
ESI level 1 or 2. Resource prediction distinguishes
the ESI from other triage systems that are based only
on acuity. When Drs. Wuerz and Eitel created the
ESI triage system, they added resource utilization to
provide additional data and allow a better, more
accurate triage decision. They believed that an
experienced emergency department (ED) triage
nurse was able to predict the nature and number of
tests, therapeutic interventions, and consultations
that a patient would need during his/her ED stay.
This has been verified in recent studies of ESI
implementation and validation, which have shown
that triage nurses are able to predict ED patients'
resource needs (Eitel, Travers, Rosenau, Gilboy &
Wuerz, 2003; Tanabe, Gimbel, Yarnold & Adams,
2004). One study was conducted at seven EDs
representing varied regions of the country, urban
and rural areas, and academic and community
hospitals. Nurses using the ESI were able to predict
how many resources the ED patients required 70
percent of the time. That is, ESI classification by
experienced triage nurses reasonably predicts at
triage how many resources patients will require to


reach ED disposition, but, more importantly,
discriminates at presentation low versus high
resource intensity patients. This differentiation by
resource requirements allows for much more
effective streaming of patients at ED presentation
into alternative operational pathways within the ED,
that is, the parallel processing of patients. Research
has also established that ESI triage levels correlate
with important patient outcomes, including
admission and mortality rates (Eitel et al., 2003).

Again, it is important to note that resource
prediction is only used for less acute patients. At
decision points A and B on the ESI algorithm (Figure
5-1), the nurse decides which patients meet criteria


**Figure 5-1. ESI Triage Algorithm, v. 4**

**AA**

**life-saving intervention?requires immediate** **_yes_** **_1_**

**_no_**

**B**

**high risk situation?**
**or**

**_yes_**

**confused/lethargic/disoriented?**
**or**
**severe pain/distress?**

##### 2

**C**

**how many different resources are needed?**

**none** **one** **many**

**D**

##### 5 4 danger zone

**_vitals?_**

**<3 m >180 >50** **_consider_**

**3 m-3y >160 >40**

**3-8 y >140 >30**

**>8y >100 >20**

**_no_**

##### 3

_©ESI Triage Research Team, 2004. Reproduced with_
_permission._

|AA requires immediate life-saving intervention?|yes|
|---|---|
|||

|ne o|ne m|
|---|---|


-----

for ESI levels 1 and 2 based only on patient acuity.
However, at decision point C, the nurse assigns ESI
levels 3 to 5 by assessing both acuity and predicted
resource needs. Thus, the triage nurse only considers
resources when the answers to decision points A and
B are “no.”

To identify ED patients' resource needs, the triage
nurse must be generally familiar with emergency
department standards of care, and, specifically, what
constitutes prudent and customary emergency care.
An easy way to think about this concept is to ask
the question, “Given this patient's chief complaint,
what resources are the emergency providers likely to
utilize?”

The triage nurse uses information from the brief
subjective and objective triage assessment, as well as
past medical history, medications, age, and gender,
to determine how many different resources will be
needed for the ED provider to reach a disposition.
For example, a healthy teenage patient with a
simple leg laceration and no prior medical history
would need only one resource: Suturing. On the
other hand, an older adult with multiple chronic
medical problems and no history of dizziness who
presents with a head laceration from a fall will
clearly need multiple resources: suturing, plus
blood/urine tests, ECG, and x-rays or consultations
with specialists. Accurate use of ESI triage is
contingent on the nurses' ability to predict resources
and as such is best performed by an experienced
emergency nurse. In general, we believe that no
matter what triage system is used, an experienced
emergency nurse is needed to safely perform triage.

Guidelines for the categorization of resources in the
ESI triage system are shown in Table 5-1 (repeat of
Table 3-1). ESI levels 3, 4, and 5 are differentiated by
the nurse's determination of how many resources
are needed to make a patient disposition. On the
basis of the triage nurse's predictions, patients who
are expected to consume no resources are classified
as level 5, those who are likely to require one
resource are level 4, and those who are expected to
need two or more resources are designated as ESI
level 3. Patients who need two or more resources
have been shown to have higher rates of hospital
admission and mortality and longer lengths of stay
in the ED (Eitel et al., 2003; Tanabe et al., 2004
Reliability and validity).

Though the list of resources in Table 5-1 is not
exhaustive, it provides general guidance on the
types of diagnostic tests, procedures, and therapeutic


treatments that constitute a resource in the ESI
system. Emergency nurses who use the ESI are
cautioned not to become overly concerned about
the definitions of individual resources. It is
important to remember that ESI requires the triage
nurse to merely estimate resources that the patient
will need while in the ED. The most common
resources are listed in Table 5-1; however a
comprehensive list of every possible ED resource is
neither practical nor necessary. In fact, all that is
really necessary for accurate ESI rating is to predict
whether the patient will need no resources, one, or
two or more resources. Once a triage nurse has
identified two probable resources, there is no need
to continue to estimate resources. The essence of the
ESI resource component is to separate more complex
(resource-intensive) patients from those with simpler
problems. The interventions considered as resources
for the purposes of ESI triage are those that indicate
a level of assessment or procedure beyond an exam
or brief interventions by ED staff and/or involve
personnel outside of the ED. Resources that require
significant ED staff time (such as intravenous
medication administration or chest tube insertion)
and those that require staff or resources outside the
ED (such as x-rays by the radiology staff or surgical
consults) increase the patient's ED length of stay and
indicate that the patient's complexity, and,
therefore, triage level is higher.


-----

There are some common questions about what is
considered an ESI resource. First, there is often a
question about the number of blood or urine tests
and x-rays that constitute a resource. In the ESI
triage method, the triage nurse should count the
number of different types of resources needed to
determine the patient's disposition, not the number
of individual tests.

- A complete blood count (CBC) and electrolyte
panel comprise one resource (lab test).

- A CBC and chest x-ray are two resources (lab test,
x-ray).

- A CBC and a urinalysis are both lab tests and
together count as only one resource.

- A chest x-ray and plain skull films are one
resource (x-ray).

- A cervical-spine films and a computerized
tomography (CT) scan of the head are two
resources (x-ray and CT scan).

Another resource frequently questioned is the
application of a splint, which does not count as a
resource. If a splint did count, patients with sprained
ankles would be triaged as ESI level 3 (x-ray and
splint application). While the application of a splint
can certainly be resource intensive, it is important to
remember the only purpose of resource prediction is
to sort patients into distinct groups and help get the
right patient to the right area of the ED. In many
EDs, ESI level-3 patients are not appropriate for a
fast track or urgent care area. Triage scores are not a
measure of total nursing workload intensity.

Another common question about ESI resources
relates to the fact that eye irrigation is also
considered a resource. Patients with a chemical
splash usually meet ESI level-2 criteria because of the
high-risk nature of the splash, so eye irrigation is not
a key factor in their ESI rating. However, if the eye
problem was due to dust particles in the eye, the
patient would not necessarily be high risk. In this
type of patient, the eye irrigation would count as a
resource and the patient would meet ESI level-4
criteria. The eye exam does not count as a resource
because it is considered part of the physical exam.
Other common questions about resources are
addressed in the Chapter 5 Frequently Asked
Questions section of Appendix A.

Another frequent question posed by clinicians is
related to the items listed as “not resources” in Table
5-1. The purpose of the list is to assist triage nurses


with quick, accurate sorting of patients into five
clinically distinct levels (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Travers
& Gilboy, 2000). As such, items listed as not being
resources include physical exams, point-of-care tests,
and interventions that tend not to lead to increased
length of stay in the ED or indicate a higher level of
complexity. Since the standard of care is that all ED
patients undergo a basic history and physical exam,
an exam and even a pelvic exam does not constitute
a resource for ESI classification. The beauty of the
ESI is its simplicity; the true goal of the resource
determination is to differentiate the more
complicated patients needing two or more resources
(level 3 or above) from those with simpler problems
who are likely to need fewer than two resources
(level 4 or 5). Emergency nurses should not try to
complicate ESI by concentrating overly on resource
definitions. Usually, a patient requires either no
resources, one, or two or more resources.

Though resource consumption may vary by site,
provider, and even individual patient, triage nurses
are urged to make the ESI resource prediction by
thinking about the common approaches to the most
common presenting problems. Ideally, a patient
presenting to any emergency department should
consume the same general resources. For example, a
provider seeing an 82-year-old nursing home
resident who has an in-dwelling urinary catheter
and a chief complaint of fever and cough will most
likely order blood and urine tests and a chest x-ray.
The triage nurse can accurately predict that the
patient needs two or more resources and therefore
classify the patient as ESI level 3.

There may be minor variations in operations at
different EDs, but this will rarely affect the triage
rating. For example, some departments do
pregnancy tests in the ED (not a resource by ESI)
and others send them to the lab (a resource by ESI).
However, patients rarely have the pregnancy test as
their only resource, so most of those patients tend to
have two or more resources in addition to the
pregnancy test. One ED practice variation that may
result in different ESI levels for different sites is the
evaluation of patients with an isolated complaint of
sore throat. At some hospitals it is common practice
to obtain throat cultures (one resource, ESI level 4),
while at others it is not (no resources, ESI level 5).
Another example of different site practice variation
is the use of the Ottowa Ankle Rules. These are
validated rules used to determine the need for an xray of the ankle for patients that present with ankle
injuries. Institutional adoption of these rules into


-----

practice varies. Institutions that use these rules at
triage may obtain fewer x-rays when compared with
institutions that do not routinely use these rules.

Temperature is an important assessment parameter
for determining the number of resources for very
young children. This subject will be covered in
Chapter 6.

From a clinical standpoint, ESI level 4 and 5 patients
can wait several hours to be seen by a provider.
However, from a customer service standpoint, these
patients are perhaps better served in a fast-track or
urgent care setting. Mid-level practitioners with the
appropriate skills mix and supervision could care for
level-4 and 5 patients. The ESI provides yet another
operational advantage, in that level-5 patients can
sometimes be “worked in” for a quick exam and


disposition by the provider, even if the department
is at capacity. Often triage policies clearly state ESI
level-4 or 5 patients can be triaged to an urgent care
or fast-track area.

In summary, the ESI provides an innovative
approach to ED triage with the inclusion of
predictions about the number of resources needed to
make a patient disposition. Consideration of
resources is included in the triage level assignment
for ESI level-3, 4, and 5 patients, while ESI level-1
and 2 decisions are based only on patient acuity.
Examples of ESI level-3, 4, and 5 patients are shown
in Table 5-2. Practical experience has demonstrated
that resource estimation is very beneficial in helping
sort the large number of patients with non-acute
presentations.


-----

### Chapter 6.The Role of Vital Signs in ESI Triage

##### Introduction Figure 6-1. Danger Zone Vital Signs

In this chapter, we focus on decision point D—the
patient's vital signs. To reach this point in the ESI **D**
algorithm, the triage nurse has already determined **_danger zone_**
that the patient does not meet ESI level-1 or 2 **_vitals?_**
criteria, and that he or she will require two or more **<3 m >180 >50** **_consider_**
resources. Since the patient requires two or more
resources, he or she meets the criteria for at least an **3 m-3y >160 >40**
ESI level 3. It is at this point in the algorithm that **3-8 y >140 >30**
vital signs data are considered, so the triage nurse's

**>8y >100 >20**

next step is to assess the patient's heart rate,
respiratory rate, and oxygen saturation, and, when
appropriate (for children under age 3), temperature.
If the danger zone vital sign limits are exceeded (as **_no_**
illustrated in decision point D, Figure 6-1), the triage
nurse must strongly consider up-triaging the patient
from a level 3 to a level 2.


During the ESI triage educational program, a
considerable amount of time should be devoted to
exploring the importance of vital signs in the
decision to move a patient from ESI level 3 to an ESI
level 2. It should be stressed that it is always the
decision of the experienced triage nurse to determine
whether the patient meets criteria for ESI level 2,
based upon their past medical history, current
medications, and subjective and objective assessment
that includes general appearance. This decision is
based on the triage nurse's clinical judgment and
knowledge of normal vital sign parameters for all


ages and the influence of factors such as medications,
past medical history, and pain level.

##### What Are Vital Signs?

Vital signs traditionally include simple measurements
of physiological parameters including temperature,
blood pressure, pulse, and respiratory rate as well as
pulse oximetry (see Table 6-1). They frequently


**Table 6-1. Standard Vital Signs**

**Vital Sign** **Definition**

Blood pressure The pressure or tension of the blood within the systemic arteries,
maintained by the contraction of the left ventricle, the resistance of the
arterioles and capillaries, the elasticity of the arterial walls, as well as the
viscosity and volume of the blood (Stedman, 1995).

Heart rate A measure of the heart's beat, recorded as the number of beats per minute
(Stedman, 1995).
Temperature The degree of temperature, an indicator of the presence of disease, or health
threat independent of other signs gathered from simple physical diagnosis.
Respiratory rate Frequency of breathing, recorded as the number of breaths per minute
(Stedman, 1995).
Oxygen saturation Oxyhemoglobin saturation according to the absorption of light. It can
provide early warning of pulmonary or cardiovascular deterioration
(Tintinalli, Kelen & Stapczynski, 2000).
Pain A noxious sensation transmitted by specialized nervous structures to the
brain, where its perception is modified by cognition and emotion (Paris,
1989; Tintinalli et al., 2000).


-----

prompt a health care worker to follow a particular
path of action. Recently, the nursing literature has
placed increased emphasis on pain. The American
Pain Society adopted the phrase “Pain: the fifth vital
sign” to increase healthcare workers' awareness of
the importance of assessment and management of
pain. Pain assessment is an important component of
ESI and is actually assessed earlier in the algorithm.
So, for the purpose of ESI, heart rate, respiratory rate,
oxygen saturation and temperature in children
under age 3 are the vital sign parameters considered
in decision point D. Vital signs represent a set of
objective data for use in determining general
parameters of patients' health and viability. The
values we obtain influence our interpretation of a
patient's overall condition and, therefore, the path
we take in establishing a diagnosis and treatment for
the patient. However, vital signs alone do not paint
a complete picture of the patient's condition. Vital
signs may be affected by a variety of factors
including prescription medications, herbals, and
recreational drugs. For example, beta-blockers cause
bradycardia and blunt the tachycardic response to
shock. Hypothyroidism, common in the elderly,
may lead to the finding of low temperature, even in
the face of sepsis. A young adult may have an
elevated body temperature due to recreational drug
use.

Vital signs are variable, dynamic indicators that are
an adjunct to a patient's evaluation. Vital sign
measurements may also be operator dependent, and
the definition of normal vital signs varies according
to the reference consulted. Even under the best
conditions, vital signs are not always reliable or
accurate (Edmonds, Mower, Lovato & Lomeli, 2002).
The patient's general appearance and clinical picture
frequently prove to be of the most value. However,
if in a triage nurse's judgment, knowing a patient's
vital signs would help with risk analysis, then vital
signs should be measured. For example, if the
patient is using immunosuppressive medications or
chemotherapy or is immunosuppressed by an illness
such as AIDS, then the body temperature should be
measured.

##### Are Vital Signs Necessary at Triage?

Prior to the advent of five-level triage in the United
States, tradition dictated that every patient
presenting to an emergency department should have
a set of vital signs taken before triage level
assignment. Vital signs were considered an integral


component of the initial nursing assessment and
were often used as a decisionmaking tool. In a
traditional three-level triage system, vital signs
helped determine how long a patient could wait for
treatment (i.e., if no abnormal vital signs were
present, in many cases, the patient could wait a
longer period of time). Vital signs, therefore, in the
past weighted heavily in the patient triage
assessment, with variable emphasis placed on the
clinical presentation.

More recently, newer triage models advocate
selective use of vital signs at triage (Gilboy, Travers &
Wuerz, 2000). Initial vital signs are not a mandatory
component of other five-level triage systems and in
general are not reported during the triage phase of a
level-1 or 2 patient (i.e., those patients with the
highest acuity). For example, the Guidelines for
_Implementation of the Australasian Triage Scale in_
_Emergency Departments states that “vital signs should_
only be measured at triage if required to estimate
urgency, or if time permits” (Australasian College for
Emergency Medicine, 2000). Similarly, the Canadian
Triage and Acuity Scale (CTAS) upholds the need for
vital signs if, and only if, they are necessary to
determine a triage level (in the cases of levels 3, 4,
and 5) as time permits (Beveridge et al., 2002. The
Manchester Triage Group uses specific vital sign
parameters as discriminators within a presentational
flow chart. The vital sign parameter is one of the
factors that help the triage nurse assign an acuity
level.

Vital signs may not always be the most appropriate
tool to determine triage acuity. At least one study
has suggested that vital signs are not always
necessary in the initial assessment of the patient at
triage. In 2002, Cooper, Flaherty, Lin, and Hubbell
examined the use of vital signs to determine a
patient's triage status. They considered age and
communication ability as factors. Twenty-four
different U.S. emergency departments and more
than 14,000 patients participated in that study. Final
results demonstrated that vital signs changed the
level of triage acuity status in only eight percent of
the cases. When further examining individual age
groups, pediatric patients age 2 or younger showed
the largest variation in triage decision with an 11.4
percent change once vital signs were collected.

##### Vital Signs and ESI Triage

Using ESI triage, the only absolute requirement for
vital signs assessment is for patients who don't
initially meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria, but who are


-----

predicted to need two or more resources. Assessment
of vital signs at triage is optional and at the
discretion of the triage nurse for patients triaged as
ESI level 1, 2, 4, or 5. While the ESI system does not
require vital signs assessment on all patients who
present to triage, local policies may dictate a
different procedure. Factors such as staffing levels,
casemix, and local resources influence individual
hospital policies regarding vital signs at triage and
are beyond the scope of this handbook. In general
when triaging a stable patient, it is never wrong to
obtain a set of vital signs. ESI requires vital signs for
only level-3 patients. (See Table 6-2)

The developers of the ESI and the current ESI
research team believe that experienced ED nurses
can use vital sign data as an adjunct to sound
clinical judgment when rating patients with the ESI.
There is limited evidence on vital sign abnormalities
as they relate to ED acuity and that are proven to
truly represent serious illness. The ESI has been


revised over time to reflect changes in the available
evidence and recommendations from the literature.
The ESI working group initially used the systemic
inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) literature
(Rangel-Frausto et al., 1995) in developing the
danger zone vital sign box and accompanying
footnotes. The first version of the ESI used the SIRS
criteria to include a heart rate of greater than 90 (for
adults) as an absolute indicator to up-triage from ESI
level 3 to level 2 (Wuerz, Milne, Eitel, Traers &
Gilboy, 2000). The SIRS research was based on
predictors of mortality in an intensive care unit
population. Based on an excess of false positives
using these criteria for ED patients at the initial ESI
hospitals, the heart rate cutoff was changed to 100
in ESI version 2, and nurses were instructed to
consider up-triage to ESI 2 for adult patients with
heart rates greater than 100 (Wuerz et al., 2001;
Gilboy, Tanabe, Travers, Eitel & Wuerz, 2003).
Additionally, pediatric vital signs were added to the
danger zone vital signs box.


-----

When using ESI as a triage system, vital signs
assessment is not necessary in the triage area for
patients who are immediately categorized as level 1
or 2. If the patient appears unstable or presents with
a chief complaint that necessitates immediate
treatment, then transport of the patient directly to
the treatment area should be expedited. For these
patients, the resuscitation team is responsible for
obtaining and monitoring vital signs at the bedside.
This would include patients that have clinical
appearances that indicate high risk or need for
immediate cardiovascular or respiratory
intervention. These patients may appear pale,
diaphoretic, or cyanotic. However, the triage nurse
has the option to perform vitals in the triage area, if
an open bed is not immediately available or if he or
she feels that the vital signs may assist in confirming
the triage acuity level. Some patients may not
initially be identified as ESI level 1 until vital signs
are taken. For example, an awake, alert elderly
patient who complains of dizziness might be found
to have a life-threatening condition when a heart
rate of 32 or 180 is discovered during vital sign
measurement.

As shown in the ESI algorithm in Chapter 3, if
patients do not meet ESI level-1 or 2 criteria, the
triage nurse comes to decision point C. The nurse
then determines how many resources the patient is
expected to need in the ED. If the patient is
expected to need one or no resources, he or she can
be assigned an ESI level of 4 or 5 and no vital sign
assessment is necessary. But if the patient is expected
to need two or more resources, then the nurse
comes to decision point D and vital signs should be
assessed. Vital signs can play a more important role
in the evaluation of some patients at triage,
especially those triaged as ESI level 3. The range of
vital signs may provide supporting data for potential
indicators of serious illness. If any of the danger
zone vital signs are exceeded, it is recommended


that the triage nurse consider up-triaging the patient
from level 3 to level 2.

Vital signs that are explicitly included in ESI triage
are heart rate, respiratory rate, and oxygen
saturation (for patients with potential respiratory
compromise). Temperature is specifically used in ESI
triage for children under age 3 (see below). It is
important to note that when considering abnormal
vital signs, blood pressure is not included in the ESI
algorithm. This does not mean that the triage nurse
should not take a blood pressure or a temperature
on older children or adults but that these vital signs
are not necessarily used to assist in selecting the
appropriate triage acuity level.

##### Vital Signs and Pediatric Fever

In this version of the ESI Handbook, version 4 (v.4)
of the ESI algorithm has been updated to include
more current pediatric fever criteria. As shown in
Figure 6-2, note D of the ESI algorithm addresses
pediatric fever considerations for ESI triage. This
section incorporates recommendations from the
American College of Emergency Physicians' Clinical
Policy for Children Younger Than Three Years
Presenting to the Emergency Department With Fever
(ACEP, 2003).

The ESI Triage Research Team recommends that vital
signs in patients under age 3 be assessed at triage. In
particular, temperature measurement is important
during triage of all children from newborn through
36 months of age, and vital sign evaluation is
essential to the overall assessment of a known febrile
infant under age 36 months (Baraff, 2000). This
helps to differentiate ESI level-2 and 3 patients and
minimize the risk that potentially bacteremic
children will be sent to an express care area or
otherwise experience an inappropriate wait.
Remember, if a patient is in immediate danger or


-----

high risk, he or she will be assigned to either ESI
level 1 or 2.

Table 6-3 provides direction for the triage nurse in
using the ESI to assess the febrile child and
determine the most appropriate triage level. The
generally accepted definition of fever is a rectal
temperature greater than 38.0° C (100.4° F) (Baraff et
al., 1993; ACEP, 2003). The infant less than 28 days
old with a fever should be considered high risk and
assigned to at least ESI level 2. There are no clear
guidelines for the infant between 28 days and 3
months of age. The ESI research team recommends
triage nurses rely on local hospital guidelines. We
suggest that the nurse consider assigning at least an
ESI level 2 for such patients.

In v. 4 of the ESI, we have incorporated a different
set of pediatric fever guidelines for children ages 3 to
36 months. These pediatric fever considerations
pertain to highly febrile children, defined as those
with a fever of greater than 39.0° C (102.2° F) (ACEP,
2003). When triaging a child between 3 and 36
months of age who is highly febrile, it is important
for the triage nurse to assess the child's
immunization status and whether there is an
identifiable source for the fever. The patient with
incomplete immunizations or with no identifiable
source for the fever should be assigned to at least ESI
level 3. If the patient has an identifiable source for
the fever and his or her immunizations are up to
date, then a rating of 4 or 5 is appropriate. For
example, a 7-month-old who is followed by a
pediatrician, has had the Haemophilus influenza
type b (HIB) vaccine and presents with a fever and
pulling on his ear could be assigned to an ESI
level 5.

##### Case Examples

The following case studies are examples of how vital
signs data are used in ESI triage.



- “My doctor told me I am about 6 weeks pregnant
and now I think I am having a miscarriage,”
reports a healthy looking 28-year-old female. “I
started spotting this morning and now I am
cramping.” No allergies, no PMH, medications:
prenatal vitamins. Vital signs: T 98° F, HR 112, RR
22, BP 90/60.

This patient meets the criteria for being up-triaged
from a level 3 to a level 2 based on her vital signs.
Her increased heart rate, respiratory rate, and
decreased blood pressure are a concern. These factors
could indicate internal bleeding from a ruptured
ectopic pregnancy.

- “The baby has had diarrhea since yesterday. The
whole family has had that GI bug that is going
around,” reports the mother of a 15-month-old.
She tells you the baby has had a decreased
appetite, a low-grade temperature, and numerous
liquid stools. The baby is sitting quietly on the
mother's lap. The triage nurse notes signs of
dehydration. No PMH, NKDA, no medications.
Vital signs: T 100.4° F, HR 142, RR 48, BP 76/50.

This patient meets the criteria for at least ESI level 3.
For resources he would require labs and IV fluid.
Based on his vital signs the triage nurse can uptriage him to an ESI level 2. For a baby this age, both
heart rate and respiratory rate criteria are violated.

- “I need to see a doctor for my cough. I just can't
seem to shake it. Last night I didn't get much
sleep because I was coughing so much, I am just
so tired,” reports a 57-year-old female. She tells
you that she had a temperature of 101° last night
and that she is coughing up this yellow stuff. Her
history includes a hysterectomy 3 years ago; she
takes no medications but is allergic to Penicillin.
Vital signs: T 101.4°, RR 28, HR 100, SpO2 90
percent.

At the beginning of her triage assessment, this
patient sounds as though she could have


**Table 6-3. ESI Pediatric Temperature Criteria**

**Age** **Temperature** **ESI level**

1 - 28 days Fever over 100.4° F 2
(38.0° C)

1 - 3 months Fever over 100.4° F Consider 2
(38.0° C)

3 - 36 months Fever over 102.2° F Consider 3
(39.0° C) (see text)


-----

pneumonia. She will need two or more resources but
her low oxygen saturation and increased respiratory
rate are a concern. After looking at her vital signs
the triage nurse should up-triage the patient to an
ESI level 2.

- A 34-year-old obese female presents to triage
complaining of generalized abdominal pain (pain
scale rating: 6/10) for 2 days. She has vomited
several times and states her last bowel movement
was 3 days ago. She has a history of back surgery,
takes no medications, and is allergic to peanuts.
Vital signs: T 97.8° F, HR 104, RR 16, BP 132/80,
SpO2 99 percent.

This patient will need a minimum of two or more
resources: lab, IV fluids, perhaps IV medication for
nausea, and a CT scan. The triage nurse would
review the patient's vital signs and consider the
heart rate. The heart rate falls just outside the
accepted parameter for the age of the patient but
could be due to pain or exertion. In this case, the
decision should be to assign the patient to ESI
level 3.

- A tearful 9-year-old presents to triage with her
mother. She slipped on an icy sidewalk and
injured her right forearm. The forearm is
obviously deformed but has good color,
sensation, and movement. The mother reports
she has no allergies, takes no medications, and is
healthy. Vital signs: BP 100/68, HR 124, RR 32,
and SpO2 99 percent.

This child is experiencing pain from her fall and is
obviously upset. She will require at least two
resources: x-ray and orthopedic consult, and perhaps
conscious sedation. Her heart rate and respiratory
rate are elevated, but the triage nurse should feel
comfortable assigning this patient to ESI level 3. Her
vital sign changes are likely due to pain and distress.

- A 72-year-old patient presents to the ED with her
oxygen via nasal cannula for her advanced
COPD. She informs the triage nurse that she has
an infected cat bite on her left hand. The hand is
red, tender, and swollen. The patient has no
other medical problems, uses albuterol prn, and
takes an aspirin daily, NKDA. Vital signs: T 99.6°
F, HR 88, RR 22, BP 138/80, SpO2 91 percent. She
denies respiratory distress.

This patient will require two or more resources: labs
and IV antibiotics. She meets the criteria for ESI level
3. The triage nurse notices that her oxygen
saturation and respiratory rate are outside the
accepted parameters for the adult but this patient
has advanced COPD. These vital signs are not a


concern so the patient will not be up-triaged but
will stay an ESI level 3.

##### Conclusion

The information in this chapter provides a
foundation for understanding the role of vital signs
in the Emergency Severity Index triage system. We
addressed the special case of patients under 36
months of age. Further research is necessary to
clarify the best vital sign thresholds used in
emergency department triage. Further study will also
examine pediatric populations presenting to the
emergency department. It is our hope that future
versions of the ESI will be based on additional
evidence regarding the predictive value of triage
vital signs for pediatric and adult patients.

##### References

The American College of Emergency Physicians. (2003).
Clinical policy for children younger than 3 years
presenting to the emergency department with fever.
_Annals of Emergency Medicine, 43(4), 530-545._

Australasian College for Emergency Medicine. (2000).
Policy document-the Australasian triage scale. Retrieved
March 27, 2002, from http://www.acem.org.au/
open/documents/triage.htm.

Australasian College for Emergency Medicine. (2000).
Guidelines for the implementation of the Australasian
triage scale in emergency departments. Retrieved March
27, 2002, from http://www.acem.org.au/open/
documents/triageguide.htm.

Baraff, L. J. (2000). Management of fever without source in
infants and children. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 36,
602-614.

Baraff, L. J., Bass, J. W., Fleisher, G. R., Klein, J. O.,
McCracken, G.H., Powell, K.R., et al. (1993). Practice
guideline for the management of infants and children
0 to 36 months of age with fever without source.
Agency for health care policy and research. Annals of
_Emergency Medicine, 22, 1198-1210._

Beveridge, R., Clarke, B., Janes, L., Savage, N., Thompson,
J., Dodd, G., et al. Implementation guidelines for the
Canadian emergency department triage and acuity
scale (CTAS). Retrieved March 27, 2001, from
http://www.caep.ca/002.policies/002-02.CTAS/CTASguidelines.htm.

Cooper, R., Flaherty, H., Lin, E., & Hubbell, K. (2002).
Effect of vital signs on triage decisions. Annals of
_Emergency Medicine, 39, 223-232._

Edmonds, Z., Mower, W., Lovato, L., & Lomeli, R. (2002).
The reliability of vital sign measurements. Annals of
_Emergency Medicine, 39, 233-237._


-----

